====== 16. ** Hilay Mangiligtah ======


{{:en:obs:obs-16-01.jpg?nolink&640x360}}


After Joshua died, the Israelites disobeyed God and did not drive out the rest of the Canaanites or obey God’s laws. The Israelites began to worship the Canaanite gods instead of the One True God. The Israelites had no king, so everyone did what they thought was right for them.

Ha panaon nan Josue, ampanombong hilay Israelita ha kalabayan nan Apo Dioh. Noba ha natey yayna, ahe la hinombong ye bilin nan Apo Dioh kanla boy ahe layna pinaalih ye kaganaan a kalahin tataon angkomonin ihtew ha Canaan. No aliwan, nakitowad hilaynan nanggalang ha dioh-diohan  lan kalahin tataon angkomonin ihtew. Kananyatew a panaon, homain hilan poon ye Israelita. Kaya-bay kalabayan laynan bengat ye andiyagen nin balang magha kanla.

BT - In the time of Josue, the Israelites are-following/obeying the will/desire of Apo God. But when he died, they did not follow/obey the commands of Apo God to-them and they did not cause-to-leave all the clans of people living there in Canaan. But rather they imitated honoring/worshipping the false-gods of the clans of people living there. At that time, the Israelites have no ruler. So just their will/desire only is what each one of them is doing.

{{:en:obs:obs-16-02.jpg?nolink&640x360}}


As a result of this disobedience, God punished the Israelites by allowing them to be defeated by their enemies. These enemies stole from the Israelites, destroyed their property, and killed many of them. After many years, the Israelites repented and asked God to rescue them.


Oli ha kabyangan nin ō lan Israelita, hiyay Apo Dioh, pinalobohan na hilan hamboten nin kaaway la. Ket hilatin kaaway la, tinakaw boy dinama lay babandi lan Israelita. Boy pinatey la hilay kanayon kanla. Pangalabah nin mangaanoy taon a kaidapan la, nakigwang hila kanan Apo Dioh, a wanla, <<Apo Dioh, amgpaghehean mi ye kakahalanan mi kammo. Kaya-bay patawaden mo kayi dayi. Ampakiiingalo kayi kammo a iligtah mo kayi kanlan kaaway mi!>>


BT - Because of the hardness of the heads of the Israelites, Apo God, he allowed that their enemies will-defeat them. And these enemies of theirs, they stole and destroyed the possessions/wealth of the Israelites. And they killed some of them. After how many years of their hardship, they prayed to Apo God, they-said, <<Apo God, we(excl) are-repenting of our(excl) sins to-you. So (you) forgive us (excl) (desire particle). We(excl) are-asking-mercy to-you that you save us(excl) from our(excl) enemies!>>

{{:en:obs:obs-16-03.jpg?nolink&640x360}}


Then God provided a deliverer who rescued them from their enemies and brought peace to the land. But then the people forgot about God and started worshiping idols again. So God allowed the Midianites, a nearby enemy tribe, to defeat them.

Kaya-bay oli ha pangingalo nan Apo Dioh ha hinabi lan Israelita, magha met ateed kanlan Israelita ye pinili nan mangiligtah la. Noba angkaliwaan layna man ye Apo Dioh ket nanggalang hilayna man ha diohdiohen. Kaya-bay impaloboh nan Apo Dioh a manambot hilay Midianita kanla.

BT - So because of the mercy of Apo God at what the Israelites said, one also again of the Israelita is whom he chose as their savior. But they are-forgetting Apo God and they honored again false-gods. So Apo God allowed that the Midianita will-defeat them.

{{:en:obs:obs-16-04.jpg?nolink&640x360}}


They took all of the Israelites’ crops for seven years. The Israelites were so scared, they hid in caves so the Midianites would not find them. Finally, they cried out to God to save them.


Nahakop hilan Midian ye Israelita ha loob nin pitoy taon. Ket ha loob nin hilain a taon, hilay Midianita ye ampangwa nin aapit la. Ket hilay Israelita, oli ha limo la, ampagtayo hila ha yoyokib ta omon la hilan ahe makitan lan Midianita. Ha kalinghoyotan, ket nakiingalo hilayna man kanan Apo Dioh, a wanla, <<Apo Dioh, amgpaghehean mi ye kakahalanan mi kammo. Kaya-bay patawaden mo kayiyna man. Ampakiiingalo kayi kammo a iligtah mo kayi kanlan kalaban mi!>>

BT - The Israelites came-to-be-under-jurisdiction of the Midianiates inside of seven years. And inside those years, the Midianites are the ones getting their harvest. And the Israelitas, because of their fear, they are-hiding in caves in order that they will- not -be-seen by the Midianites. At the end, they asked-mercy again to Apo God, they-say, <<Apo God, we(excl) are-repenting of our(excl) sins to-you. Therefore (you) forgive us(excl) again. We(excl) are-asking-mercy to-you that you save us(excl) from our(excl) enemies!>>

{{:en:obs:obs-16-05.jpg?nolink&640x360}}


One day, a man named Gideon was secretly harvesting grain so the Midianites would not steal it. The angel of God came to Gideon and said, “God is with you, mighty warrior. Go and save Israel from the Midianites.”

Ha maghay mangaamot, intobol na yan Apo Dioh ye pānobolen na ha maghay lāki a nagngalan Gideon. Hiyay Gideon, ampagtayo yan ampanggiek, ta angkalimo ya kanlan Midianita. Hinabi nan panobolen kanan Gideon, a wana, “Gideon, minged ka, ta hika ye mak-haw a hondaloh. Pinili na kan Apo Dioh a māngiligtah kanlan Israelita.”

BT - One day, Apo God sent his sent-one to go to a man who was-named Gideon. Gideon, he is-hiding threshing-[grain], for he is-afraid of the Midianita. The sent-one spoke to Gideon, he-said, “Gideon, you will-be-gooded, for you are a strong soldier. Apo God chose you to save the Israelites.”

{{:en:obs:obs-16-06.jpg?nolink&640x360}}


God told Gideon to tear down his father’s idol. Gideon was afraid of the people, so he waited until nighttime. Then he tore down the idol and smashed it to pieces. He built an altar to God where the idol used to be and made a sacrifice to God.

Hinabi na po nin pānobolen, a wana, “Imbilin nan Apo Dioh a damaen moy andiohen nan bapa mo.” Noba hiyay Gideon, angkalimo ya kanlan tatao. Kaya-bay pinakadeglem na po. Ket ha madeglem ana, dinama nan Gideon ye andiohen nan bapa na haka na tinemek-temek. Pangayadi, ha nangipalontoan nin andiohen nan bapa na, nanyag yan pangihagpaan. Ket nangihagpa yan digalo kanan Apo Dioh. 

BT - The sent-one still spoke, “Apo God commanded that (you) destroy what your father is-worshipping.” But Gideon, he is-being-afraid to the people. So he still waited-til-night. When evening already, Gideon destroyed what his father is-worshipping and he crushed/smashed [it]. Afterwards, on the putting-on-top-of-place ofwhat his father is-worshipping, he made a altar (lit. setting-down-place). And he set-down/offered a gift to Apo God.

{{:en:obs:obs-16-07.jpg?nolink&640x360}}


The next morning the people saw that the idol had been torn down, and they were very angry. They went to Gideon’s house to kill him, but Gideon’s father said, “Why are you trying to help your gods? If they are gods, let them protect themselves!” So Gideon was saved.


Kabekahan, nakit lan tatao a nadama ana ye andiohen la. Ket napoot hilan tobat. Kaya-bay nakew hila ha baey nan Gideon, ta labay la yan pateyen. Noba hinabi nan bapa nin Gideon, a wana, “Taket ta anhaglapan yoy dioh? No peteg a dioh ya, paolayan yo man awod a hiyabay ye mamae kanan Gideon.” Oli yatin hinabi na, pinaolayan la yan teed. Kaya-bay, naligtah yay Gideon.

BT - Next-morning, people saw that destroyed is what they are-worshipping. And they were very angry. So they went to the house of Gideon, for they wanted to kill him. But the father of Gideon spoke, he-said, “Why are you helping god? If true that he is god, (you-PL) leave-alone then that he will-take-revenge to Gideon.” Because of this he said, they then left- him -alone. So, Gideon was-saved.

{{:en:obs:obs-16-08.jpg?nolink&640x360}}


Then the Midianites came again to steal from the Israelites. There were so many of them that they could not be counted. Gideon called the Israelites together to fight them. Gideon asked God for two signs so he could be sure that God would use him to save Israel.


Ha ahe maboyot, anti hilay naman ye Midianita a mangwa nin apit lan Israelita. Ahe mabilang-bilang ye kalabongan la. Ket hiyay Gideon, hinagyat na hilay Israelita a lomaban kanlan Midianita. Noba bayo hilan linomaban, hiyay Gideon, nakikwa yan pagkakitan kanan Apo Dioh, no a hiyabay ye gawien na a māngiligtah kanlan Israelita. 


BT - Not long-time, those Midian are present to get the harvest of the Israelita. Not be-counted is their being-many. And Gideon, he invited the Israelites to oppose those Midianites. But before they fought, Gideon, he asked sign to Apo God, if he is the one he will-use as savior to the Israelites.

{{:en:obs:obs-16-09.jpg?nolink&640x360}}


First, he laid a cloth on the ground and asked God to let the morning dew fall only on the cloth and not on the ground. God did that. The next night, he asked that the ground be wet but the cloth dry. God did that too.


Hiyay ona nan dinyag, nangiamlak yan tapih ha lota. Pangayadi, inawok na kanan Apo Dioh, a wana, “Apo, no hikoy pinili mo, biyan mo kon pagkakitan. Palobohan mon mabaha nin ambon yatin tapih, noba hiyay lota ha palibot na ket ahe.” Ket dinyag nan Apo Dioh ye inawok na. Ha domondon a madeglem, inawok nay naman, a wana, “Apo, no hikoy peteg a pinili mo, biyan mo koyna man nin pagkakitan. Palobohan mo a palibot nin tapih bengat ye mabaha, adi ana mabaha ye tapih.” Ket dinyag nayna man Apo Dioh ye inawok nan Gideon kana.

BT - The first that he did, he laid down cloth on the ground. Afterwards, he requested to Apo God, he-said, “Apo, if I am the one you chose, (you) give me a sign. (You) allow to become-wet the cloth by the dew, but the ground around it, don't [be-wet].” And Apo God did what he requested. The next night, requested again to Apo God, he-said, “Apo, if I am truly the one you chose, (you) give me a sign. (You) allow that around the cloth only will-be-wet, not be-wet now the cloth.” And Apo God did again what Gideon requested to-him.

{{:en:obs:obs-16-10.jpg?nolink&640x360}}


32,000 Israelite soldiers came to Gideon, but God told him this was too many. So Gideon sent home 22,000 who were too scared to fight. God told Gideon that he still had too many men. So Gideon sent all of them home except for 300 soldiers.


Main 32,000 hondaloh lan Israelita ye nakew kanan Gideon. Noba hinabi nan Apo Dioh kana, a wana, “Bawahan mo hila, ta malabong hilan tobat.” Ket hiyay Gideon, pinaoli nay 22,000 a angkalimon makilaban. Noba hinabi na po nin Apo Dioh kana, a wana, “Hali po, bawahan mo po, ta malabong hila po ateed.” Kaya-bay pinaoli na hilay  kanayon po angga ha 300 anan bengat ye napatla.

BT - There were 32,000 soldiers of the Israelitas who went to Gideon. But Apo God said to-him, he-said, “(You) lessen them, for they are very many.” And Gideon, he sent-home 22,000 soldiers who were afraid to fight. But Apo God spoke again to-him, he-said, “Still [too many], (you) lessen still your soldiers, for they still are many.” So Gideon sent-home again other soldiers until 300 only were-left.

{{:en:obs:obs-16-11.jpg?nolink&640x360}}


That night God told Gideon, “Go down to the Midianite camp and when you hear what they say, you will no longer be afraid.” So that night, Gideon went down to the camp and heard a Midianite soldier telling his friend about a dream. The man’s friend said, “This dream means that Gideon will defeat Midian!” Gideon worshiped God.

Kananyatew a madeglem, hinabi nan Apo Dioh kanan Gideon, a wana, “Makew kan maniem ha kampo lan Midianita. Ket no malenge moy anhabiyen la, homain kaynan limo.” Kaya-bay hiyay Gideon, nakew yan naniem ha kampo lan Midianita. Ket ha anti yayna ihtew, nange nay maghay hondalo a ampangihabi nin taynep na kanan kalamo na. Hinabi nan kalamo na, a wana, “Hiyay labay habiyen nin taynep mo, ket hamboten la kitawon Gideon.” Ha nange nan Gideon ye yatew, nanggalang ya kanan Apo Dioh. 

BT - That night, Apo God spoke to Gideon, “(You) go to the camp of the Midian. If you will-hear what they are-saying, you have no more fear.” So Gideon, he went to the camp of his enemies at night. And he arrived-on a soldier who was-awake speaking his dream to a soldier who is his companion. And he spoke to his companion, “The meaning to say of your dream, Gideon(PL) will-defeat us(incl).” And when Gideon heard what the soldiers are-talking-about in the camp, he worshipped/praised Apo God.

{{:en:obs:obs-16-12.jpg?nolink&640x360}}


Then Gideon returned to his soldiers and gave each of them a horn, a clay pot, and a torch. They surrounded the place where the Midianites were sleeping. The 300 men had the torches in the pots so they could not be seen.

Haanin, nag-odong yaynay Gideon kanlan hohondaloh na, ket binyanan na hilan titimaghan tamboyok, koden boy tinlag. Pangayadi, pinalibotan lay kampo lan Midianiata a angkatoloy po. Ket hilay 300 a hohondaloh na, hinalokoban lan koden ye tinlag la omon ya ahe makit.

BT - Now, Gideon returned already to his soldiers, and he gave them each a trumpet, a pot and torch. Afterwards, they surrounded the camp of the Midianita who are-sleeping still. And his 300 soldiers, they covered their torches with pots that it will- not -be-seen.

{{:en:obs:obs-16-13.jpg?nolink&640x360}}


Then, at the same time, they all broke the pots that were hiding the torches. They blew their horns and shouted, “A sword for God and for Gideon!”


Ha napalibotan la hilaynay Midianita, nayngingidlan hilan namatnoy nin tamboyok la haka la pinha ye koden a nakahalokob ha tillag la. Boy impangha la, a wanla, “Oli kanan Apo Dioh boy kanan Gideon, tawoyna!”

BT - When had surrounded the Midianites, at-same-time they made-noise with their trumpets and they broke the pot which they [used] to-cover-up their torches. And they shouted, they-said, “Because of Apo God and Gideon, let's go!”

{{:en:obs:obs-16-14.jpg?nolink&640x360}}


God confused the Midianites, so that they attacked each other and started killing each other. Immediately, the rest of the Israelites were called from their homes to come help chase the Midianites. They killed many of them and chased the rest of them out of their land. 120,000 Midianites died that day. God had saved Israel.


Ket hiyay Apo Dioh, nilimang-limang nay ihip lan Midianita ta omen hila met ateed ye naypateyan boy nipapayew hilay kanayon. Hilay kanayon a Israelita, kinamat la hilan pinatey ye nipapayew. Main 120,000 a Midianita ye natey kananyatew a mangaamot.  Hilay napatla, intaboy la hila ha ilwah nin logal la. Ket ha wanabay, hiyay Apo Dioh ye namahambot kanlan Israelita.

BT - And Apo God, he confused the minds/thinking of the Midianites so that they also killed-each-other and others ran-away-from-each-other. Other Israelites, they caught-up-with them and killed the ones running-away. There were 120,000 Midianites who died that day. Those left, they drove them outside their place. And in like-that, Apo God caused- Israelites -to-win/triumph.

{{:en:obs:obs-16-15.jpg?nolink&640x360}}


The people wanted to make Gideon their king. Gideon wisely refused their offer, but he asked them for some of the money that each of them had taken from the enemy. Gideon received a lot of money.

Haanin, hinabi lan Israelita kanan Gideon, a wanla, “Labay mi a hika ye mamoon kammi.”
Noba hinabi nan Gideon kanla, a wana, “Ahe ko labay ye mamoon kanyo. Biyan yo koynan bengat nin pilak ha nahamham yo kanlan kakaaway tawo.” Ket malabong a pilak boy balitok ye in-ibyay la kana. 

Now, the Israelites spoke to Gideon, they-said, “We(excl) want that you will be the one to rule us(excl).”
But Gideon spoke to-them, he-said, “I don't want to rule-over you(PL). (You-PL) just give me money from what  you(PL) snatched from our(incl) enemies.” And many are the money and gold which they gave to-him.

{{:en:obs:obs-16-16.jpg?nolink&640x360}}


Then Gideon did a foolish thing. He made an idol with the money, and the people turned away from God again. They started worshiping Gideon’s idol.


Pangayadi, hiyay Gideon, nanyag yan aliwan manged ha pamilew nan Apo Dioh. Ta hiyay pilak boy balitok a natanggap na, ket dinyag na yan diohdiohan. Oli ha dinyag nan Gideon nin diohdiohan, ket tinomalingkokol hilaynay Israelita kanan Apo Dioh boy tinowad la yay Gideon a ampanggalang ha diohdiohan.

BT - Afterwards, Gideon, he did not good in the sight of Apo God. For the money and gold which he received, he made a false-god. Because Gideon made a false-god, the Israelites turned-away-from Apo God and they imitated Gideon who is-honoring/worshipping a false-god.

{{:en:obs:obs-16-17.jpg?nolink&640x360}}


God punished Israel again for worshiping idols. Their enemies defeated them. They finally asked God for help, and God sent them another deliverer. This pattern of sin, punishment, repentance, and deliverance was repeated many times. God sent many deliverers who saved Israel from their enemies.


Haanin, bilang padoha nan Apo Dioh kanlan Israelita, nahambot hilayna man kanlan kaaway la. Kaya-bay nakiingalo hilayna man kanan Apo Dioh, a wanla, “Apo Dioh, amgpaghehean mi ye kakahalanan mi kammo. Kaya-bay patawaden mo kayiyna man. Ampakiiingalo kayi kammo a iligtah mo kayi kanlan kalaban mi!” Ket oli ha paghehe lan Israelita, nangitobol yayna man ye Apo Dioh nin kanayon a mangiligtah kanla. Yatin andiyagen lan Israelita a magkahalanan, mapadohaan, maghehe bayo iligtah na hilan Apo Dioh, ket malabong anan okdo. 

BT - Now, as punishment of Apo God to the Israelites, they were-defeated again by their enemies. So they asked-mercy again to Apo God, they-said, “Apo God, we(excl) are-repenting of our(excl) sins to-you. Therefore (you) forgive us(excl) again. We(excl) are-asking-mercy to-you that you will-save us(excl) from our(excl) enemies!” And because of their repenting, Apo God sent again other saviors/deliverers to them. This being-done by the Israelites that sin, be-punished, repent before Apo God will-save them, many times now.

{{:en:obs:obs-16-18.jpg?nolink&640x360}}


Finally, the people asked God for a king like all the other nations had. They wanted a king who was tall, strong, and could lead them into battle. God did not like this request, but He gave them what they wanted.

Ha kapopohan, hinabi lan Israelita kanan Apo Dioh, a wanla, “Apo, hilay kaganaan a kalahin tatao ha palibot mi ket main hilan poon. Labay dayi Apo, a biyan mo kayi met nin pagpoon mi. Ket no malyadi dayi, matagay ya, makhaw boy makpen mangona kammi ha labanan.”
Hinabi nan Apo Dioh kanla, a wana, “Ahe ko nalabayan ye hinabi yo. Noba agya wanabay man, ibyay ko kanyo ye awok yo.”

BT - At the end, the Israelites spoke to Apo God, they-said, “All the kinds/clans of people in our(excl) surrounding, they have rulers. [We] want (desire particle) Apo, that you(sg) will-give also to be our(excl) ruler. And if possible (desire particle), he is tall, strong and persevering to lead in battle.”
Apo God spoke to-them, he-said, “I don't like what you said. But even-though like-that, I will-give you(PL) your(PL) request.”


//A Bible story from: Judges 1-3; 6-8//