====== ** 17. God’s Covenant with David ======


{{:en:obs:obs-17-01.jpg?nolink&640x360}}


Saul was the first king of Israel. He was tall and handsome, just like the people wanted. Saul did well at first, but he became a wicked man who did not obey God, so God chose a different man who would one day be king in his place.

Main lāki ha Israel a nagngalan Saulo. Matagay ya boy manged yan laki. Hiya ye onan pagpoon ha Israel. Hiyay Saulo, ha babayon yan nikno a manakop kanla, manged ye andyagen na, noba ha kaboyotan nan ampanakop, nag-ilyadi yan malambong boy ahe yayna ampanombong ha kalabayan nan Apo Dioh. Kaya-bay oli ha kalok-an a dinyag nan Saulo, namili yayna man ye Apo Dioh nin kahagili na a mamoon kanlan Israelita.

BT - There was a man in Israel who was-named Saulo. He is tall and good [looking] man. He is first ruler of Israel. Saulo, when he first sat to have-jurisdiction to-them, good is what he is-doing, but in the long-time of his having-jurisdiction, he became proud and he is- not -now following/obeying the will/desire of Apo God. So because of the evil which Saulo did, Apo God chose again his replacement who will-rule the Israelites


{{:en:obs:obs-17-02.jpg?nolink&640x360}}


This man’s name was David. He was a shepherd from the town of Bethlehem. While watching the sheep, David had killed both a lion and a bear which had attacked the sheep. David was a humble and righteous man who trusted and obeyed God.

Ket hiyay David ye pinili nan Apo Dioh a kahagiliyan nan Saulo a mamoon kanla. Hiyay David, magha yan pahtol nin aayop. Noba bayo ya namoon kanlan Israelita, wanae ye nalyadi. Legan ampagpahtol yan topa, nakit na hilay mangatobag a ayop a mandoyong kanlan topa na. Ket hiyay dinyag nan David, pinatey na hilay mangatobag a aayop ta main yan kakpehan. Noba hiyay David, magmakaaypa ya, matoynong, boy ampamteg ya kanan Apo Dioh.

BT - And David is the one Apo God chose as the replacement of Saulo who will-rule them. David, he is a pastor/shepherd of animals. But before he ruled the Israelites, like-this is what happened. While he is-pastoring/shepherding the sheep, he saw wild animals attacking his sheep. And what David did, he killed the wild animals for he has perseverance/courage. But David, he is humble, righteous, and he is-believing Apo God.

{{:en:obs:obs-17-03.jpg?nolink&640x360}}


David was also a great soldier and leader. When David was still a young man, he fought against a giant named Goliath. Goliath was a trained soldier, very strong, and almost three meters tall! But God helped David kill Goliath and save Israel.


Ha bayontawo yay David, main hilan kalaban ye Israelita a nagngalan Goliat. Hiyay Goliat, kaginta a lāki boy magha yan hondaloh a magaling, makpeh boy mak-haw ya. Hiyay katagayan na, maigit 3 mitodo! Ket agya kotiti yay David, linabanan na yay Goliat. Noba hinaglapan na yan Apo Dioh ye David a mamatey kanan Goliat, a agya palhiit bengat ye ginawi na, ket natey yay Goliat. Kaya-bay nailigtah hilay Israelita kanlan kalaban la. 

BT - When David is young-man, the Israelites have an enemy who was-named Goliat. Goliat, [is] a large man and he is a soldier who is skilled, brave/persevering and strong. His height, greater than 3 meters! And even-though David is very-small, he fought-against Goliat. But Apo God helped David to kill Goliat that even sling only is what he used. Therefore the Israelites were-saved from their enemies.


{{:en:obs:obs-17-04.jpg?nolink&640x360}}


Saul became jealous of David and tried many times to kill him. One day Saul was looking for David so he could kill him. Saul went into the same cave where David was hiding but did not see him. Instead of killing Saul, David cut off a piece of his clothes to prove to Saul that he would not kill him to become king.

Hiyay Poon Saulo, tobat ye imon na kanan David boy nikaano na yaynan pihahapda a pateyen. Ha maghay mangaamot, nakew yan nanoday ye Saulo ha ampagtayoan nan David. Noba hiyay Saulo, ahe na ya angkakit ye David. Noba hiyay David, angkakit na yay Saulo, ket malyadi na yayna dayin pateyen, noba ahe na dinapat no aliwan pinapakana na yan iniwa nin makandin bengat ye badon hoot nan Saulo. Ta ahe na labay a makaoli ha pamatey na, ket mag-ilyadi yan poon.   

BT - Ruler Saulo, great is his envy to David and many [times] he is-planning/scheming to kill. One day, Saulo went to urinate at the hiding-place of David. But Saulo, he did not see David. But David, he is-seeing Saulo, and can (desire particle) kill him, but he did not do it but rather slowly he just cut-with-knife small [part] of the clothes of Saulo. For he did not want that because of his killing, he will-become ruler.

{{:en:obs:obs-17-05.jpg?nolink&640x360}}


Eventually, Saul died in battle, and David became king of Israel. He was a good king, and the people loved him. God blessed David and made him successful. David fought many battles and God gave him victory. David conquered Jerusalem and made it his capital. During David’s reign, Israel became powerful and wealthy.

Ha naboboyot makandi, natey yay Saulo ha maghay labanan. Haanin, malyadi yaynan mikno ye David a poon lan Israel. Manged yan pagpoon boy kalabaylabay la yan tatao. Hiyay David, in-inged na yan Apo Dioh. Kaya-bay nikalabong yan nanambot ha labanan. Ha nanakop ya ha banwan Jerusalem, linamoan na yan Apo Dioh. Kaya-bay hiyay banwan Jerusalem ye nag-ilyadin capitulyo nin Israel. Ha panaon a pamoon nan David, ket nag-ilyadin makapalyadiyan boy mabandi ye matiboen logal a Israel. 

BT - After a little while (lit. When long-time little), Saulo died in a battle. Now, David can sit as ruler of Israel. He is good in ruling and the people like him. David, he was-gooded-to by Apo God. Therefore many he won in battle. When he took-jurisdiction of the town of Jerusalem, Apo God companioned-with him. Therefore the town of Jerusalem became the capitol of Israel. In the time of the ruling of David, the whole place of Israel became powerful and wealthy.

{{:en:obs:obs-17-06.jpg?nolink&640x360}}


David wanted to build a temple where everybody could worship God and offer him sacrifices. For about 400 years, the people had been worshiping God and offering sacrifices to him at the Tent of Meeting that Moses had built.

Hatew, ha loob nin 400 a taon, hiyay Tabirnakolo a pikakaget lan Israelita ye anggawien lan panggalangan boy pangihagpaan nin idigalo la kanan Apo Dioh. Noba haanin, hiyay Poon David, labay nay mangipaideng nin maghen a mayadet a panggalangan kanan Apo Dioh a anhabtan Templo.

BT - In time-past, inside of 400 years, the Tabirnakolo which the Israelites are-carrying-around is what they are-using to honor/worship and setting-down-place of what they will-give-as-gift to Apo God. But now, Ruler David, he wants to build (lit. cause-to-stand) a firm big worship/honoring-place to Apo God which is being-called Templo.

{{:en:obs:obs-17-07.jpg?nolink&640x360}}


God sent the prophet Nathan to David with this message, “Because you are a man of war, you will not build this house for me. Your son will build it. But, I will bless you greatly. Someone from your family will always sit on the throne of Israel, and the Messiah will be one of your descendants!” The Messiah is God’s Chosen One who would save the world from sin.


Noba intobol na yan Apo Dioh ye propetan Natan a makew kanan Poon David. Hinabi nan Natan kanan David, a wana, “Wanae ye hinabi nan Apo Dioh kangko a habiyen ko kammo. Oli ta hondaloh ka boy nakapatey ka, aliwan hikay malyadin manyag baey nan Apo Dioh, no aliwan hiyay anak mo. Noba agya wanabay man, inged na kan teed nin Apo Dioh. Boy aliwa po bengat yain, ta hiyay lahi mo, hilabay bengat ye mikno ha pamiknoan nin poon lan Israelita. Boy mangibat ya ha lahi mo ye lomateng a Māngiligtah!”

BT - But Apo God sent the prophet Natan to go to Ruler David. Natan spoke to David, he-said, <<Like-this is what Apo God said to-me that I will-say to-you. Because you are a soldier and you have-killed, not you can build the house of Apo God, but rather your child. But even-though like-that, Apo God still will-do-good-to you. And not just that, for your clan, they only are the ones who will-sit on the sitting-place of the ruler of the Israelita. And from your clan will-arrive the Savior!”

{{:en:obs:obs-17-08.jpg?nolink&640x360}}


When David heard these words, he immediately thanked and praised God because he had promised David this great honor and many blessings. The Israelites would have to wait a long time before the Messiah came, almost 1,000 years.


Ha nange nan David ye hinabi nan Natan, tampol yan nagpahalamat boy nanggalang kanan Apo Dioh oli ta impangako nan Apo Dioh kana a biyan na yan kangedan. Noba hilay Israelita, mangagad hila po nin malibon taon bayo ya lomateng kanla ye Māngiligtah la.

BT - When David heard what Natan said, quickly he gave-thanks and honored/worshipped Apo God because Apo God promised to-him that he will-give him goodness. But the Israelita, they still will-wait one thousand years before their Messiah will-arrive.

{{:en:obs:obs-17-09.jpg?nolink&640x360}}


David ruled with justice and faithfulness for many years, and God blessed him. However, toward the end of his life he sinned terribly before God.

Manged ye pamoon nan David ha Israel. Matoynong ya boy in-inged na yan Apo Dioh. Agya wanabay man, ha kapopohan nin bi-ay na, nakadiyag yan mabyat a kahalanan ha adapan nan Apo Dioh.

BT - Good is the ruling of David in Israel. He is righteous and Apo God did-good-to him. Even-though like-that, at the end of his life, he did a heavy sin before Apo God.

{{:en:obs:obs-17-10.jpg?nolink&640x360}}


One day, when all of David's soldiers were out fighting, he got up from an afternoon nap and saw a beautiful woman bathing. Her name was Bathsheba.

Ha maghay mahilem, legan anlomaban hilay hohondaloh na, angkatoloy yay David ha baey na. Ha nimata ya, nalonglongan na yan ampalyo ye Batseba a maada a babayi.

BT - One afternoon, while his soldiers are-fighting, David is-sleeping at his house. When he woke-up, he glanced-down at Batseba bathing who is a beautiful woman.

{{:en:obs:obs-17-11.jpg?nolink&640x360}}


Instead of looking away, David sent someone to bring her to him. He slept with her and sent her back home. A short time later Bathsheba sent a message to David saying that she was pregnant.


Tanatana talingkokolan na ya dayi ye babayi, nagkamalih impakwa na ya. Ket ha inlateng la yay babayi, tinakeh na ya. Ha pamigantah na yan tinakeh, pinaoli na yayna. Ha ahe maboyot, impabalita nan Batseba a habiyen kanan David, a wana, “Pinaboktot mo ya, ket hikay bapa nan anak.” 

BT - Quickly he will-turn-back-on the woman (desire particle), but instead he caused-to-get her. And when they arrived-to him the woman, he hugged her (euphemism for sex). When he finished hugging her, he sent- her -home. When not long-time, Batseba caused-to-be-newsed that will-be-said to David, she-said, “You caused- her -to-be-pregnant, and you are the father of the child.”

{{:en:obs:obs-17-12.jpg?nolink&640x360}}


Bathsheba's husband, Uriah, was one of David’s best soldiers. David called Uriah back from the battle and told him to go be with his wife. But Uriah refused to go home while the rest of the soldiers were in battle. So David sent Uriah back to the battle and told the general to place him where the enemy was strongest so that he would be killed.


Hiyay Batseba, main yan ahawa a magha kanlan magaling a hondaloh nan Poon David. Hiyay ngalan na ket Urias. Hinagyat na yan David ye Urias a omalih ya ha labanan ta mag-odong ya ha Israel. Ha linomateng yayna kanan Poon David, hinabi nan David kana, “Moli kayna ha baey mo, ta id-an mo ya po ye ahawa mo.” Hinabi nan David yati ta omen na ahe mabaan nin Urias a tinakeh na yan David ye ahawa na. 
Noba hiyay Urias, ahe na labay ye mida ta an-ihipen nay kaidapan nin kalalamoan na a anlomaban. Kaya-bay hiyay David, hinolatan na yay opihyal nan Urias. Ket wanae ye nakaholat, “Ipadongla mo yay Urias ha labanan ta omon yan matey.” Ket hiyay opihyal, tinopad nay inholat nan David. Kaya-bay natey yay Urias ha labanan, agya po magaling ya.

BT - Batseba, she has a husband who is one of the skilled soldiers of Ruler David. His name is Urias. David invited Urias to leave the battle for the will-return to Israel. When he arrived now to Ruler David, David said to-him, “(You) go-home to your house, for you will-lie-with (euphemism for sex) still your wife.” David spoke this in order that Urias will not think that David hugged (euphemism for sex) his wife.
But Urias, he did not want to lie-with [her] for he is-thinking of the harship of his companions who are-fighting. So David, he wrote-to the official of Urias. And like-this is what was-written, “(You) cause-to-be-in-front Urias in battle in order that he will-die.” And the official, he fulfilled what David wrote. Therefore Urias died in battle, even-though still he is skilled.

{{:en:obs:obs-17-13.jpg?nolink&640x360}}


After Uriah was killed, David married Bathsheba. Later, she gave birth to David's son. God was not pleased with what David had done, so he sent the prophet Nathan to show David his sin. David repented of his sin and God forgave him. For the rest of his life, David trusted God, even in difficult times.


Ha natey yay Urias, hiyay dinyag nan Poon David, inahawa na yay Batseba. Ket inlomateng ye panaon, in-anak nay yaynay boktot na, ket magha yan ongi a lāki. Ket yatin panamham nin babayi a dinyag nan David, napoot yay Apo Dioh. Kaya-bay intobol na yayna man ye propetan Natan kanan David, a wana, “David, nagkahalanan ka kanan Apo Dioh.” Ha nange nan David ye hinabi nan Nathan, naghehe ya, ket pinatawad na ya met nin Apo Dioh. Paibat kananyatew, agya malabong ye kaidapan a angkadihaan na, namteg ya met ateed kanan Apo Dioh.

BT - When Urias died, what Ruler David did, he married Batseba. And the time arrived, she gave-birth to what he was-pregnant with, and he is a baby boy. And this that David did, Apo God became-angry. So he sent again the prophet Natan to David, he-said, “David, you sinned to Apo God.” When David heard what Natan said, he repented, and Apo God also forgave hime. From then, even-though many still are the harships he is-experiencing, he believed anyway in Apo God.

{{:en:obs:obs-17-14.jpg?nolink&640x360}}


But as punishment for David's sin, his baby boy died. There was also fighting in David’s family for the rest of his life, and David’s power was greatly weakened. Though David had been unfaithful to God, God was still faithful to his promises. Bathsheba gave birth to another son named Solomon.

Noba hiyay padoha a nadihaan na, natey yay anak nan David kanan Batseba boy naagwat ana met ye kapah-eyan nin pamoon na. Agya po man nakadyag yan kahalanan ha pamilew nan Apo Dioh, ket mapah-ey po ateed ye pangako nan Apo Dioh kana. Haanin, nagkaanak yan oman ye David kanan Batseba nin maghay lāki a pinangalanan lan Solomon.

BT - But the punishment which he experienced, the child of David to Batseba died and the strength (lit. firmness) of his ruling was- also already -destroyed (lit. torn-down). Even-though still he did sin in the sight of Apo God, firm still is the promise of Apo God to-him. Now, David came-to-have child again to Batseba a male whom they named Solomon.

//A Bible story from: 1 Samuel 10; 15-19; 24; 31; 2 Samuel 5; 7; 11-12//