====== ** 19. Hilay popodopeta ======


{{:en:obs:obs-19-01.jpg?nolink&640x360}}


Throughout the history of the Israelites, God sent them prophets. The prophets heard messages from God and then told the people God’s messages.


Paibat ha onan panaon, an-itobol nan Apo Dioh ye propeta a makew kanlan Israelita. Ta hilabay anay mangipatanda kanlan tatao nin an-ipahabi/bibilin nan Apo Dioh.

BT - From the first time, Apo God is-sending his prophets to go to the Israelites. For they are the ones who will-cause-to-know to the people the commands of Apo God.


1. Way-omen naghabi yay Apo Dioh kanlan tatao?



{{:en:obs:obs-19-02.jpg?nolink&640x360}}


Elijah was a prophet when Ahab was king over Israel. Ahab was an evil man who encouraged people to worship a false god named Baal. Elijah said to Ahab, “There will be no rain or dew in Israel until I say so.”

Hatew ha panaon nan Poon Acab, hiyay Elias propeta nin Dioh ha Israel. Hiyay Poon Acab, in-atay na hilay tataon manggalang kanan Baal a aliwan peteg a dioh. Ket hinabi nan Elias kana, a wana, “Tandah yan mangodan ha kaganaan a lologal nin Israel agya dalaidi bengat anggan ahe ko po habiyen a mangodan oman.” Kaya-bay napoot yan tobat ye Poon Acab.

BT - In-time-past in the time of Ruler Acab, Elias is the prophet of God in Israel. Ruler Acab, he persuaded the people to honor/worship Baal who is a not true God. And Elias spoke to-him, he-said, "[It] will not rain in all the places of Israel even only sprinkle while I have not yet said that [it] will-rain again." So Ruler Acab was very angry.

1. Hinyay inadalan Poon Acab kanlan tatao?

2. Hinyay impahabi nan Apo Dioh kanan Poon Acab makaoli kanan Elias?

3. Taket ta napoot yay Poon Acab?

{{:en:obs:obs-19-03.jpg?nolink&640x360}}


Then God told Elijah to hide in the wilderness near a stream. Every morning and every evening, birds would bring him bread and meat. Ahab and his army looked for Elijah, but they could not find him. The drought was so severe that the stream eventually dried up.

Hilay tatao nan Poon Acab, antapolen la yay Elias. Noba ahe la ya nakitan ta pinatayo na yan Apo Dioh ha maghay logal a main hobol a ampinoman. Ket tepe mahanib, main oowak a ampangilakew kana nin tinapay boy kena. Noba oli ta ahe yayna ampangodan, ket namal-an yaynay hobol a ampinoman na.

BT - The people of Ruler Acab, they are-looking-for Elias. But they did not find him for Apo God caused- him -to-hide in a place which has a spring which [he] is-drinking-from. And each morning, there are crows which are-bringing to-him bread and meat. But because it is- not -raining, became-dry already the spring he is-drinking-from.

1. Taket ta hilay hondaloh nan Poon Acab, ahe la ya nakitan ye Elias?

2. Way-omen nangan boy ninom yay Elias?

3. Hinyay nalyadi ha hobol ihtew?


{{:en:obs:obs-19-04.jpg?nolink&640x360}}


So Elijah went to a neighboring country. A widow and her son had almost run out of food because of the famine. But they took care of Elijah, and God provided so that neither their flour jar nor their bottle of oil ever ran out. They had food through the whole famine. Elijah stayed there a long time.

Ket hiyay Apo Dioh, pinalakew na yay Elias ha maghan nahyon a maahaley ha Israel. Main met bawon babayi ihtewbay a main maghay anak a laki. Ket madanon anan maoboh ye pamangan la, oli ta naboyot anan homain odan. Noba agya wanabay man, pinaona laya po a pinakan ye Elias. Ket hiyay nalyadi, agya naboyot yay Elias ihtewbay, ahe la angkaobohoboh ye tapok la, boy ahe la angkaobohoboh ye taba a pamakaoto, ta hiyay Apo Dioh ye ampamyay nin tapok boy taba a pamakaoto la.

BT - And Apo God, he caused-to-go Elias to a nation which is close to Israel. There also is a widow there who has a male child. And soon now will-be-empty/consumed their food, because long-time now there is no rain. But even-though like-that, they still caused-to-go-first to eat Elias. And what happened, even-though Elias was long-time there, they are- not -consuming-all their flour, and they are- not -consuming-all the fat which is-for-cooking, for Apo God is the one who is-giving their flour and fat which is-for-cooking.

1. Hinyay dinyag nan bawo kanan Elias?

2. Taket ta ahe maoboh ye pamangan la?




{{:en:obs:obs-19-05.jpg?nolink&640x360}}


After three years, God told Elijah to return to Israel and speak with Ahab because He was going to send rain again. When Ahab saw Elijah he said, “There you are, you troublemaker!” Elijah said, “You are the troublemaker! You have abandoned the true God and worshiped Baal. Bring all of Israel to Mount Carmel.”

Pangalabah nin tatlon taon boy kagitna, hinabi nan Apo Dioh kanan Elias, a wana, “Mag-odong kayna ha Israel, ta habiyen mo kanan Poon Acab a paodanen koyna.” 
Noba ha nakit na yay Elias, hinabi na met kanan Elias, a wana, “Ah! Anti kan bengat manayti ihen a mapanggolo ha Israel!” 
Nakibat yay Elias, a wana, “Hikay mapanggolo ha Israel! Ta naliwaan moy peteg a Dioh. Ket haanin, ampanggalang kayna kanan Baal a aliwan peteg a dioh. Kaya-bay haanin, itobol mo hilay tatao a makew ha matondol nan Carmelo.”

BT - After three years and a half, Apo God spoke to Elias, he-said, “(You) return to Israel, for (you) tell Ruler Acab that I will-cause-to-rain now.”
But when he saw Elias, he spoke to Elias, he-said, “Ah! You are just present (surprise particle) there who is the trouble-maker in Israel!”
Elias answered, he-said, “You are the trouble-maker in Israel! For you forgot the true God. And now, you are-honoring/worshipping Baal who is the not true god. Therefore now, (you) send people to go to the mountain-peak of Carmelo.”

1. Hinyay habiyen nan Apo Dioh kanan Poon Acab?

2. Ha nakit na yan Poon Acab ye Elias, hinyay natanam na?

3. Hinyay diklamo nan Elias kanan Poon Acab?


{{:en:obs:obs-19-06.jpg?nolink&640x360}}


All the people of the kingdom of Israel, including the 450 prophets of Baal, came to Mount Carmel. Elijah said to the people, “How long will you keep changing your mind? If Yahweh is God, serve him! If Baal is God, serve him!”

Kaya-bay nakew hilan kaganaan a tatao ihtew ha Mapantay nan Carmelo, lamo la hilay 450 a popodopeta nan Baal. Ket hinabi nan Elias kanlan Israelita, a wana, “Paholong nayi a paoman oman ye ihip yo tongkol kanan Apo Dioh? No hiyay Apo Dioh ye peteg a Dioh, paghilbiyan yo ya. Noba no hiyay Baal ye peteg a Dioh, ket hiyabay anan bengat ye paghilbiyan yo!”

BT - Therefore all the people went there to the Mountain of Carmelo, companioned with the 450 prophets of Baal. And Elias spoke to the Israelitas, he-said, "Will-continue (rhetorical question marker) that change-over-and-over is your(PL) thinking about Apo God? If Apo God is the true God, (you-PL) serve him. But if Baal is the true God, he now only is the one you(PL) will-serve!"

1. Hinyay nakew ha Mapantay nan Carmelo?

3. Hinyay labay nan matandaan Elias kanlan Israelita?


{{:en:obs:obs-19-07.jpg?nolink&640x360}}


Then he said to the prophets of Baal, “Kill a bull and prepare a sacrifice, but do not light the fire. I will do the same. The God who answers with fire is the real God.” So the priests of Baal prepared a sacrifice but did not light the fire.

Pangayadi, hinabi nan podopetan Elias kanlan popodopeta nan Baal, a wana, “Mangwa kawo nin hinapo a kena a ihagpa yo. Noba adi yo paetan nin apoy a pangolam. Ta no peteg a hiyay Baal ye Dioh, hiyabay tana ye mangolam.  Agya hiko met, wanabay met ateed ye dapaten ko papainghan.” Ket dinapat lan peteg nin podopeta nan Baal ye hinabi nan podopetan Elias.

BT - Afterwards, the prophet Elias spoke to the prophets of Baal, he-said, "(You-PL) get cut-up meat that you(PL) will-offer. But don't you light with fire to burn. For if true that Baal is God, he then only is the one to-burn. Even I also, like-that also is what I will-do later(today)." And the prophets of Baal truly did what the prophet Elias said.

1. Hinyay impadyag nan podopeta Elias kanlan popodopeta nan Baal?

2. Hinyay dinyag lan popodopeta nan Baal?



{{:en:obs:obs-19-08.jpg?nolink&640x360}}


Then they prayed to Baal, “Hear us, O Baal!” All day long they prayed and shouted and even cut themselves with knives, but Baal did not answer.

Ket nakigwang hila, a wanla, “Dioh min Baal, leng-en mo kayi.” Nikahilem hilan ampakigwang a ampangha boy anhogat-hogaten lay loti la noba homain yan pakibat ye Baal.

BT - And they prayed, they-said, "God of ours(excl) Baal, (you) listen-to us(excl)." All-afternoon they are-praying shouting and they are-slicing still their skin but Baal has no answer.

1. Hinyay labay la kanan Baal?

2. Hinyay dinyag lan popodopeta nan Baal?

3. Hinyay dinyag nan Baal?


{{:en:obs:obs-19-09.jpg?nolink&640x360}}


At the end of the day, Elijah prepared a sacrifice to God. Then he had twelve huge pots of water poured on top of the sacrifice until the meat, the wood, and even the ground around the altar was completely wet.

Ket ha mahilem ana, hiyay Elias, nangihagpa ya met nin hinapo a baka kanan Apo Dioh a anggalangen na. Ket hiyay dinapat na, pinabohbohan na po nin lanom a labinlowan halaw ye hagpa na. Ket naheb anan lanom ye pandongot boy palibot nin hagpa.

BT - And when afternoon now, Elias, he also offered (lit. set-down) cut-up cow to Apo God whom he is-honoring. And what he did, he caused-to-be-poured-on still twelve jars of water on his offering. And was-filled now with water is the ?? and surrounding of the offering.

1. Hinyay dinyag nan Elias?

2. Taket ta pinabohbohan na nin lanom ye hagpa na?


{{:en:obs:obs-19-10.jpg?nolink&640x360}}


Then Elijah prayed, “O LORD, God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, show us today that You are the God of Israel and that I am Your servant. Answer me so that these people will know that You are God.”

Pangayadi nan impabohbohan, ket nakigwang ya, a wana, “Apo a Dioh nan Abraham, Isaac boy Hacob, ipakit mo haanin a hika ye peteg a Dioh nin Israel boy hika ye Dioh a ampaghilbiyan ko. Ket leng-en mo Apo ye pamakigwang ko kamo ta omen la matandaan nin tatao a hika ye peteg a Dioh.”

BT - After he caused-to-be-poured-on, he prayed, he-said, "Apo God of Abraham, Isaac, and Hacob, (you) show now that you are the true God of Israel and you are the God whom I am-serving. And (you) listen Apo to my praying to-you in order that the people will-know that you are the true God."

1. Taket ta hinabi nan Elias a hiyay Apo Dioh ye Dioh nan Abraham, Isaac, boy Hacob?

2. Taket ta labay nan Elias a leng-en nan Apo Dioh ye pamakigwang na?



{{:en:obs:obs-19-11.jpg?nolink&640x360}}


Immediately, fire fell from the sky and burned up the meat, the wood, the rocks, and even the wet ground around the altar. When the people saw this, they fell on the ground and said, “The LORD is God! The LORD is God!”

Kapipikhaan, nangiampag yan peteg ye Apo Dioh nin apoy a ibat ha langit a nangolam nin baka, kayo boy dadapah angga ha kinomlang [check kinomting from comp check] ye lota ha palibot nin pangihagpaan. Ket ha nakit lan tatao yatin nalyadi, nanlimokod hila boy hinabi la, a wanla, “Hika Apo Dioh ye peteg a Dioh! Hika Apo Dioh ye peteg a Dioh!”

BT - Suddenly, Apo God truly made-fall fire from heaven which burned-up the cow, wood and rocks until ?? the ground around the altar (lit. setting-down-place). And when the people saw this which happened, they kneeled-down and they spoke, they-said, "You are Apo God who is the true God! You are Apo God who is the true God!"

1. Hinyay nalyadi ha hagpa na boy palibot?

2. Hinyay dinyag lan tatao?

3. Hinyay hinabi la?


{{:en:obs:obs-19-12.jpg?nolink&640x360}}


Then Elijah said, “Do not let any of the prophets of Baal escape!” So the people captured the prophets of Baal. Then Elijah took them away and killed them.

Ket hinabi nan Elias kanlan tatao, a wana, “Dakepen yo hila! Adi yo hila ampaolayen a makatakah ye poporopeta nan Baal!” Kaya-bay, dinakep na hila boy pinatey.

BT - And Elias spoke to the people, he-said, "(You-PL) capture them! Don't you(PL) disregard/pay-no-attention that the prophets of Baal will-be-able-to-escape! Therefore, they captured them and killed [them].

1. Hinyay bilin nan Elias kanlan tatao?

2. Hinyay dinyag nan Elias kanlan popodopeta nan Baal?


{{:en:obs:obs-19-13.jpg?nolink&640x360}}


Then Elijah said to King Ahab, “Return immediately to the city, for the rain is coming.” Soon the sky grew black, and a large rain storm came. God had ended the drought and proved that He is the only God.

Ket hinabi na met nin Elias kanan Poon Acab, a wana, “Tampol kaynan mag-odong ha mayadet a banwa ta madanon anay malgeh a odan.” Ahe nagboyot, nangodan yaynan peteg nin malgeh boy makhaw ye agoot. Ha pangayadi nin makhaw a agoot, ket natandaan laynay Dioh a kaptegan oli kananyatin nalyadi.

BT - And Elias also spoke to Ruler Acab, he-said, "Quickly (you) return now to the large city for soon now is the heavy rain." Not long-time, it rained truly strongly and strong is the wind/typhoon/cyclone. When finished the strong wind/typhoon/cyclone, they knew already the true God because of this happening.

1. Hinyay nalyadi ha ahe naboyot?

2. Hinyay pinaptegan nan Apo Dioh?


{{:en:obs:obs-19-14.jpg?nolink&640x360}}


After Elijah, God chose Elisha to be His prophet. God did many miracles through Elisha. One time, Naaman, an enemy commander, found out he had a horrible skin disease called leprosy. He had heard of Elisha so he went and asked Elisha to be healed. Elisha told him to dip himself seven times in the Jordan River.

Ha nanik yay Elias ha langit, ket hiyay Eliseo met ye kahagiliyan na. Boy malabong ye dinyag nan Apo Dioh a kapagtakaan makaoli kanan Eliseo. Hiyay maghan kapagtakaan a dinyag nan Apo Dioh, ket hiyay pamaitaah nan Eliseo kanan Naaman a kapitan nin hohondalon kalaban la. Main yan ampakailoy a hakit ha loti ye Naaman, ket nabalitaan nay tongkol kanan Eliseo. Kaya-bay pinakihabi na kanan Eliseo, a wana, “No malyadi dayi, paitaahen mo ko.” Ket haanin, intobol na yan Eliseo ye Naaman a makew a donglep nin piton okdo ha Kabatowan nin Jordan.

BT - When Elias went-up to heaven, Eliseo then is his replacement. And many were the times Apo God did amazing-thing by-means-of Eliseo. One of the amazing-things which Apo God did, is the healing by Eliseo to Naaman who is captain of the soldiers of their enemies. Naaman has a very disgusting/ugly sickness on the skin, and he heard-news about Eliseo. Therefore he cause-to-speak to Eliseo, he-said, "If possible (desire particle), (you) heal me." And now, Eliseo sent Naaman to go dip-down seven times in the River Jordan.

1. Hinyay kahagili nan Elias?

2. Hinyay maghay kapagtakaan a dinyag nan Apo Dioh makaoli kanan Eliseo?

3. Hinyay labay nan Naaman?

4. Hinyay bilin nan Eliseo kanan Naaman?


{{:en:obs:obs-19-15.jpg?nolink&640x360}}


At first Naaman was angry and would not do it. But later he changed his mind and dipped himself seven times in the Jordan River. When he came up the last time, his skin was completely healed! God had healed him.

Ha pamakange nan Naaman ye hinabi nan Eliseo, napoot ya boy ahe na labay ye manombong. Noba dinonglep ya met ateed nin piton okdo. Ket ha ikapiton pandomlep nan Naaman boy ha kinomondolaw ya, ket nakit na a homain yaynan hakit ha loti, ta pinaitaah na yaynan Apo Dioh.

BT - When Naaman heard what Eliseo said, he was-angry and he did not want to follow/obey. But he dipped-down anyway seven times. And on the seventh dipping-down of Naaman and when he came-up, he saw that he has no more sickness on skin, for Apo God healed him.

1. Ha nange nan Naaman ye bilin nan Eliseo, hinyay natanam na?

2. Ha kalinghoyotan, hinyay dinyag nan Naaman?

3. Hinyay dinyag nan Apo Dioh kanan Naaman?


{{:en:obs:obs-19-16.jpg?nolink&640x360}}


There were many other prophets. They all told the people to stop worshiping idols and to start showing justice and mercy. The prophets warned the people that if they did not turn from their sins and start living obedient lives, then God’s judgment would come, and He would punish them.


Hilay popropeta, lanang lan an-ipatanda kanlan tatao, a wanla, “Maghehe kawoyna ha kakahalanan yo boy itgen yoynay panggalang yon aliwan peteg a dioh. Ta no ahe kawo manopad ha bibilin nin Apo Dioh, homain hapo a padohaan na kawo.”

BT - The prophets, always they are-causing-to-know to the people, they-say, “(You-PL) repent now of your(PL) sins and (you-PL) stop honoring your(PL) not true gods. For if you(PL) do not fulfill the commands of Apo God, certain that he will-punish you(PL).”

1. Hinyay bilin nan Apo Dioh kanlan Israelita?

2. Hinyay diyagen nan Apo Dioh kanlan Israelita no ahe hila manopad ha bibilin na?

{{:en:obs:obs-19-17.jpg?nolink&640x360}}


Most of the time, the people did not listen. They often mistreated the prophets and sometimes even killed them. Once, the prophet Jeremiah was put into a dry well and left there to die. He sank down into the mud that was in the bottom of the well, but then the king had mercy on him and pulled him out before he died.


Noba, adi lan teed an-ibabano ye bibilin a an-ipatanda lan popodopeta na. No minghan, ampateyen la hila o ampahakitan la hilay kanayon a omon kanan propeta Jeremias. Ta in-ampag la ya ha namal-an a libon boy linakwanan la ya ta omon ya matey ihtewbay. Noba naingalo yay poon kana. Kaya-bay nilakew na yan kingwa ta omen ya ahe matey.

BT - But, they still are- not -acknowledging recognizing the commands which the prophets are-causing-to-know. Sometimes, they are-killing them or they are-mistreating/causing-pain-to others like to prophet Jeremias. For they dropped him in a dry well and they abandoned/left-alone in order that he will-die there. But the ruler had-mercy to-him. So he went to get him in order that he will- not -die.

1. Hinyay andyagen lan Israelita kanlan popodopeta nan Apo Dioh?

2. Hinyay dinyag la kanan Jeremias?

3. Hinyay dinyag nan poon kanan Jeremias?


{{:en:obs:obs-19-18.jpg?nolink&640x360}}


Even though the prophets were hated, they continued to speak for God. They warned people that they would be destroyed if they did not repent. They also reminded people of the promise that God’s Messiah would come.


Hilay popropeta, agya angkapatiyatiyan hila, ket imbabala la po ateed ye impatanda nan Apo Dioh kanla, a wanla, “No ahe kawoyna maghehe ha kakahalanan yo, madama kawo.” Impaihip la met, a wanla, “Yo! Ihipen yoy impangako nan Apo Dioh a itobol na yay Mesias a Mangiligtah kantawo.”

BT - The prophets, even-though they are-being-oppressed/treated-badly, they exhorted anyway what Apo God caused-to-know to-them, they-said, "If you(PL) do not now repent of your(PL) sins, you(PL) will-be-destroyed." They also caused-to-think, they-said, "Yo! (You-PL) think-about what Apo God promised that he will-send a Mesias Savior to-us(incl)."

1. Hinyay impaihip lan popodopeta kanlan Israelita tongkol ha kakahalanan la?

2. Hinyay impaihip lan popodopeta kanlan Israelita tongkol ha Mangiligtah?


//A Bible story from: 1 Kings 16-18; 2 Kings 5; Jeremiah 38//