====== ** 20. The Exile and Return ======


{{:en:obs:obs-20-01.jpg?nolink&640x360}}


The nations of Israel and Judah both sinned against God. They broke the Covenant that God made with them at Mount Sinai. God sent His prophets to warn them to repent and worship Him again, but they refused to listen.

Hilay tataon nahyon Israel boy Juda, ahe hila ampanopad ha bibilin nan Apo Dioh a in-ibyay na ihtew ha Mapantay nin Sinai. Kaya-bay, nagkahalanan hila kanan Apo Dioh. Oli kananyatin dinyag la, nangitobol yayna man ye Apo Dioh nin popropeta na a mangibabala kanla, noba aghilan teed tinomopad.

1. Why did God say that Israel and Judah had sinned against him?
2. Why did God send prophets to the Israelites?
3. What did the Israelites do when God sent prophets to them?


{{:en:obs:obs-20-02.jpg?nolink&640x360}}


So God punished both nations by allowing them to be destroyed. Israel was destroyed by the Assyrian Empire, a powerful, cruel nation. The Assyrians killed many Israelites, took away everything of value, and burned much of the country.

Ket hilay taga Assiria, hinambot la hilay Israelita. Homain hilan lonoh ye taga Asiria boy malabong ye pinatey la a taga Israel haka la inolam ye kaganaan a hahakop la.


Hinambot hilan hohondalon nin nahyon Asiria boy malabong a tataon pinatey la boy inolam lay babanwa ha Israel. Hilay taga nahyon Asiria, dinama lay kaganaan a hakop nin Israel. Boy kingwa lan kaganaan a mangaalaga a babandi la.

1. How did God punish the Israelites?
2. What did the Assyrians do to the Israelites?


{{:en:obs:obs-20-03.jpg?nolink&640x360}}


The Assyrians gathered all the leaders, the rich people, and the people with skills and took them to Assyria. Only the very poor Israelites who had not been killed remained in Israel.


Ket hilay popoon lan Israelita, hilay mangabatnang boy hilay mangagagaling manyag nin bibilding ha banwa la, ket inawoyon la hilan inlakew ha logal lan taga Asiria.


Pangayadi, tinapol la hila popoon, mangabatnang, boy magaling a tatao. Ket inawoyon la hilan balol a palakew ha Asiria. Ket hilay maidap anan bengat ye nabantak ha Israel. 

1. Who did the Assyrians take back to Assyria?
2. Why do you think they did that?
3. Who were left in Israel?



{{:en:obs:obs-20-04.jpg?nolink&640x360}}


Then the Assyrians brought foreigners to live in Israel. The foreigners rebuilt the destroyed cities and married the Israelites who were left there. Their descendants were called Samaritans.

Hilay taga Asiria, nangipalakew hilan kanayon a tataon ibat ha kanayon a lologal a makew ha Israel, ta ipaideng la yan oman ye naolam a panakopan ta ihtewbay hilayna komonin boy nakaahawa po nin Israelita ye kanayon kanla. Ket hilay aanak la, hinabtan la hilan “Samaritano”.

Ket hilay taga-Asiria, inlamo la hila met ye dadayohan kanlan nabantak a Israelita. Haanin, hilay dadayohan, naki-ahawa hila kanlan nabantak a Israelita. Ket hilay aanak la, nahabtan hilan “Samaritano”. 

1. Who did the Assyrians bring to live in Israel?
2. What did the foreigners do in Israel?
3. Who are the Samaritans?


{{:en:obs:obs-20-05.jpg?nolink&640x360}}


The people in the kingdom of Judah saw how God had punished the kingdom of Israel for not believing and obeying Him. But they still worshiped idols and the gods of the Canaanites. God sent prophets to warn them, but they refused to listen.


Hilay tatao ha Juda, nakitan lan kaganaan ye pamadoha nan Apo Dioh ihtew ha Israel, oli ha ahe la panombong kanan Apo Dioh. Noba nagpaholong hilan teed a nanggalang ha andiyohen lan Cananeo. Hiyay Apo Dioh, nangitobol yan popropita a namabala kanla, noba adi la yan teed imbabano.

1. What had God done to Israel?
2. Did Juda learn a lesson from what happened to Israel?
3. What did the prophets tell those in Judah?


{{:en:obs:obs-20-06.jpg?nolink&640x360}}


About 100 years after the Assyrians destroyed Israel, God sent Nebuchadnezzar, king of the Babylonians, to attack Judah. Babylon was a powerful empire. The king of Judah agreed to be Nebuchadnezzar’s servant and pay him lots of money every year.


Ha nalabah ye 100 a taon paibat ha nadama ye nahyon Israel, hiyay Apo Dioh, intobol na yay Nabukadnezar a poon ha nahyon Babilonia, lamo na hilay  hohondaloh na, a mandawohong ha banwan Juda. Ket hinambot la hilay Israelita. Kaya-bay nag-ilyadi hilan iipoh nin taga Babilonia boy pabayaden la hila nin taon-taon nin mayadet/malake a pilak kanlan taga Babilonia.  

1. Why did King Nebuchadnezzar attack Israel?
2. Who won the battle?
3. After the battle, what did the king of Judah decide to do?  


{{:en:obs:obs-20-07.jpg?nolink&640x360}}


But soon the people of Judah rebelled against the Babylonians. So, the Babylonians came back and attacked them. They captured the city of Jerusalem, destroyed the Temple, and took away all the treasures.


Hilay Israelita, linabanan la hilay taga Babilonia. Kaya-bay, hilay Babilonia, kinobkob lay banwan Jerusalem, ta inagwat lay Himbaan boy kingwa lay kabandiyan. 

1. What did the people of Judah do to the Babylonians?
2. What did the Babylonians do to Judah?


{{:en:obs:obs-20-08.jpg?nolink&640x360}}


To punish Judah’s king for rebelling, Nebuchadnezzar’s soldiers killed the king’s sons in front of him and then made him blind. After that, they took the king away to die in prison in Babylon.


Hiyay poon ha nahyon Israel, nilomaban ya kanlan hohondaloh nan Nabukadnezar. Kaya-bay, pinatey la yay anak na ha adapan na haka la met tinleh ye mata nan poon. Pangayadi impaatel la ya ha Babilonia ta omon ya maibalol anggan angkabi-ay ya.

1. How did Nebuchadnezzar's soldiers punish the king of Judah?
2. Who was put in prison in Babylon?


{{:en:obs:obs-20-09.jpg?nolink&640x360}}


Nebuchadnezzar and his army took all the people of Judah to Babylon, leaving only the poorest people behind to plant the fields. This is called the Exile.


Hiyay Nabukadnesar boy hohondaloh na, in-alih la hilay tatao ha Juda pweda po kanlan mangaidap a mānanem ha talon la. Ket yatin logal, angkahabtan, “Pāngalihan.”   

1. What did King Nebuchadnezzar do with the rich people of Judah?
2. What did King Nebuchadnezzar do with the poor people of Judah?


{{:en:obs:obs-20-10.jpg?nolink&640x360}}


Even though the Exile was punishment for their sin, God did not forget His people or His promises. God watched over His people and spoke to them through His prophets. He promised that, after seventy years, they would return to the Promised Land again.


Ha anti hilay kapiyol ha logal a nangitaponan pagkabihag la, ket agna hila pinaolayan nin Apo Dioh. Hiyay Apo Dioh, kinatongtong na hila makaoli kanlan propita a intobol na. Hinabi nan Apo Dioh kanla, a wana, “Pangayadi nin 70 a taon, iodong katawon oman ha Juda."   

1. How did God show that he had not forgotten his people, those from Juda?
2. What did he promise the people of Judah?      


{{:en:obs:obs-20-11.jpg?nolink&640x360}}


About seventy years later, Cyrus, the king of the Persians, defeated Babylon. The Persians were a strong but merciful people. The Israelites were now called Jews and most of them had lived their whole lives in Babylon. Only a few very old Jews even remembered the land of Judah.


Hilay Israelita, kinomonin hila ha Babilonia ha loob nin 70 a taon. Ket  malabong anay nangalyadi boy nanga-oman. Haanin, hiyay Ciro a Poon ha Persia, nanambot ya kanlan Babilonia. Kaya-bay nahakop na hilay Israelita a anti ha nahyon Persia. Ket hilay Israelita, anhabtan la hilaynan Jujudio. Ket ha kaboyotan lan kinomonin a mataang ha logal la ha Juda, makandi bengat ye maihipan ye Juda. 

1. What happened to the Babylonians?
2. Why did only a few Jews remember their place of Judah?     


{{:en:obs:obs-20-12.jpg?nolink&640x360}}


Shortly after Cyrus came to power, he did something that had never been done before in history. He gave an order that any Jew who wanted to return to Judah could go. He even gave them money to rebuild the Temple! After seventy years in exile, a small group of Jews returned to Jerusalem.


Ha ahe naboyot a ampanakop ye Poon Ciro, impabalita nay bilin, a wana, “Hikawon Jujudio, malyadi kawoynan moli ha Juda, ta ipaideng yon oman ye naagwat a Himbaan.” Ket nag-odong ye maghay pangkat lan Jujudio ha Jerusalem.

1. What did King Cyrus tell the Jews to do?
2. Why do you think this king sent these slaves of his back to their former place to rebuild their temple?


{{:en:obs:obs-20-13.jpg?nolink&640x360}}


When they arrived, they rebuilt the Temple and the wall around the city of Jerusalem. Although they were still ruled by other people, they lived in the Promised Land again and worshiped at the Temple.


Ha anti hilayna ha Jerusalem, impaideng lan oman ye Himbaan boy impaideng la met ye alad nin banwan Jerusalem. Agya po anti hila ha hakop nin dadayohan. Ket malyadi hilayna man a komonin ha lota a impangako nan Apo Dioh kanla boy anlomoob hilayna ha Himbaan a manggalang kanan Apo Dioh. 

1. What did these Jews do when they arrived in Jerusalem?
2. Who had jurisdiction over Jerusalem at this time?



//A Bible story from: 2 Kings 17; 24-25; 2 Chronicles 36; Ezra 1-10; Nehemiah 1-13//