<USFM>

\c 5
\s Peace and joy before God
\p
\v 1 Because of fully believing in God's promise, we have been made right before Him. That means we are already at peace with God through our Lord Christ Jesus!
\v 2 By our faith, Christ has brought us to God's kindness which we now enjoy. And we truly rejoice because we have the hope of enjoying God's glory.
\v 3 We also rejoice because of the suffering we experience. Why do we rejoice because of that suffering? Because we know that suffering makes us become more patient.
\v 4 That patience makes us endure testing, and enduring testing gives us hope.
\v 5 And hope never disappoints us because God has poured out His love to fill our hearts. God has given us His love through the Holy Spirit who has been given to us.
\p
\v 6 In the past, man couldn't do anything at all to become right before God. But Christ died for us who always opposed God just when we were in that condition.
\v 7 It's very difficult for someone to sacrifice himself to save another person— even if the person is honest. But a person might sacrifice himself and die to save his close friend.
\v 8 But Christ died for us while we were still living as sinful people who opposed God. In that way, God has shown that He really loves us.
\p
\v 9 For that reason, it has become very clear: Because we've been made right before God though the blood of Christ, God is certainly no longer angry with us, and will save us from the punishment He'll inflict on everyone who sins.
\v 10 And we can be sure about that! For if God's Son died for us while we were still opposing God, it's even more certain that Jesus will save us who are now at peace with God from the final judgment— when God destroys all evil people. And our salvation is even more sure because Jesus— who died for us in the past, has come to life again, and continues to guard us!
\v 11 It's not only salvation that makes us truly rejoice now. But we also rejoice and are proud of what our Lord Christ Jesus has done so that our relationship with God has been restored.
\s Our inheritance from Adam: death. but our inheritance from Jesus: life!
\p
\v 12 So this is what happened: When the first man, Adam, fell into sin, the power of sin like a hereditary disease spread to all men. And along with the power of sin,death came too. For that reason, everyone dies of course, because everyone has sinned.
\v 13 The power of that sin was in the world before people heard the Law. But God doesn't count sin as an offense if people haven't yet heard the teaching that's in the Law.
\v 14 Even so, from the time of Adam until Moses, as a result of Adam's sin, every human experienced death. At that time, people didn't break the Law like Adam broke the command of God in the garden of Eden, but people still couldn't escape death.
\p Adam illustrates the Christ whom God promised to come later.
\v 15 But what Adam did and what Christ did are so vastly different! The result of Adam's offense was that all mankind inherit death. But the result of the sacrifice of Christ, everyone can be made right before God and receive eternal life! That show that God's kindness is incredibly amazing!
\v 16 As a result of Adam's sin, everyone deserved punishment. For after Adam sinned, mankind committed sin more and more. But what God has done now is very different and amazing— in that God gives a gift through Christ so that we who have done so very many sins can be made right before Him!
\v 17 Because of the offense of one person, death controls everyone like a harsh king contols his subjects. But what's even more amazing is the result of what was done for us by another Man— who is Christ Jesus! Because of God's amazing kindness, we were freed from the power of sin and death, and we'll take part in reigning with Christ.
\p
\v 18 So the offense of Adam alone made everyone deserve destruction. But the result of the work of Christ alone is that the way was opened for each person to be made right and receive eternal life!
\v 19 And so also, because of one man who didn't obey God, everyone became sinners. But as the result of another Man, who obeyed God, everyone was given the opportunity to be made right before God.
\v 20 It's apparent that God gave the Law to mankind so that offenses and sin become more and more obvious. But as mankind sins more and more, God's kindness is more amazing, so that everyone can be forgiven.
\v 21 So mankind used to live under the power of sin, and that also brought us death. But now God's kindness has power over us. For that reason, we're made right before Him, and are given eternal life through what was done by our Lord Christ Jesus.

</USFM>
~~DISCUSSIONS:on~~
