<USFM>

\c 6
\p
\v 1 Every slave who has become a follower of Christ should respect his master completely. In that way, other people won't insult God and our teaching.
\v 2 And urge each slave like this, “If your master's family is of the same faith as you, don't feel that's a reason to have less respect for them. But you must work more diligently to serve them, because they're your beloved brothers and sisters in the faith.”
\s Misleading teaching and genuine riches
\p So Timothy, you should continue to teach, and urge all the Lord's churches that you serve to do the things mentioned.
\v 3-4 For if there's a person who teaches wrong teachings, he's arrogant and doesn't know anything. By saying 'wrong teachings', I mean teachings that go against the true teaching\f + \fr 6:3 \fk true teaching \ft Literally, “teaching that's healthy.” Healthy teaching is teaching that has proven to produce good things when put into practice. See the note in 1 Tim. 1:5.\f* which comes from our Lord Christ Jesus, and which don't lead to the life that glorifies God. People who teach misleading teachings like that are always happy to debate and argue about things that aren't important— like small differences in the meanings of terms. But debates like that only give rise to envy, divisions, slander and suspicion of each other.
\v 5 People like that always bring up arguments about unimportant things. Their thinking has become disordered so that they aren't able to distinguish between right and wrong anymore. And they think that following certain religious rules is the key so that God will bless them with riches.
\p
\v 6 But in a spiritual way, we really receive great riches if we feel content with what we have, and keep living according to God's will.
\v 7 We didn't bring anything into this world when we were born, of course, and we won't take any treasure when we leave this world.
\v 8 So if we already have food and clothing, that's enough for us.
\v 9 But people who want to become rich often fall when they experience temptation. And they're caught in the devil's trap when— without realizing the danger, they follow their lusts here and there, and suffer great loss. As a result they're suddenly totally destroyed— like being caught in a disastrous flood.
\v 10 For the love of money is the main cause of every kind of evil. There are many people who've gone astray and left their faith in Christ by chasing after the wealth of this world, and in the end what they get is just deep bitterness and great suffering.
\s The vision and mission that Paul gives to Timothy
\p
\v 11 But Timothy, because you belong to God, keep far away from all that. Keep pursuing the life that's right, and is according to God's will. Keep believing in Christ, show love to everyone, endure suffering, and keep a gentle attitude.
\v 12 Like a person determined to train himself for a sports competition, fight hard so that you keep believing completely in true teaching. Fight to get the victory prize according to God's call for you— which is eternal life. Remember that you weren't ashamed to confess your faith before the crowd.
\v 13 So now I urge you to promise again before God, who gives life to every creature, and before Christ Jesus, who boldly acknowledged Himself before Pontius Pilate:
\v 14 Carry out every command of Christ with a pure heart, and without blemish or fault, until our Lord Christ comes back again.
\v 15 The right time for His coming is determined by God— the one and only Authority who is praised, the King of all kings and Lord of all lords.
\v 16 He's the only one who never dies, who lives in light which is so bright that no one can come near Him. The people who're in this world have never seen Him, and no one is able to see Him. Honor and power be to Him forever! Amen.
\p
\v 17 Advise people who're rich in the wealth of this world not to be arrogant, and not to hope in possessions which don't last, but to hope in God alone. For God generously provides for all we need with all of His riches, and He blesses all of that for us to enjoy.
\v 18-19 Advise them also to become rich in God’s eyes— which is being generous, loving to give, and using their wealth to do good deeds. In that way, it's as if they save up treasure in heaven— where that treasure is like good savings for their future life in heaven, so that they have complete hope in their share in the life that's genuine.
\p
\v 20 Timothy, keep working at the task of ministry that God has entrusted to you. Keep yourself far from the teachings that don't glorify God, and from useless debates with people who oppose us based on their 'knowledge'. That 'knowledge' of theirs is actually stupidity.
\v 21 By following that 'knowledge', there are people who've gone astray and left the true faith.
\p And to all who read this letter, my prayer is that God’s kindness will always be with each of you.

</USFM>
~~DISCUSSIONS:on~~
