====== Checking the Translation ======

//Preface to the Questions...//

**Comprehension Questions and Answers**

In this section are a series of questions that the translation team can use to check their translation of the Open Bible Stories with members of the language community. The purpose of these questions is to make sure that the translation clearly communicates the meaning of the stories. To use these questions, follow this process:

  - 	Someone reads one of the Open Bible Stories to one or more members of the language community who will answer the questions. These members of the language community must be people //who have not been involved in the translation//. In other words, the community members who are asked the questions should not already know the answers to the questions from working on the translation or from previous knowledge of the Bible. We want them to be able to answer the questions only from hearing or reading the Open Bible Stories.
  - 	A member of the translation team asks the community members some of the questions for that story, one question at a time. It is not necessary to use all of the questions for each story if it seems that the community members are understanding the translation well.
  - 	After each question, a member of the language community answers the question. 
  - 	A member of the translation team writes down the answer that the person gives. If the person’s answer is similar to the suggested answer that has been provided for the question, then the translation of the story is clearly communicating the right information at that point. The answer does not have to be exactly the same as the suggested answer to be a right answer, but it should give basically the same information. 
  - 	If the answer is unexpected or very different than the suggested answer, or if the person cannot answer the question, then the translation team will need to revise the translation of the part of the story that communicates that information so that it communicates the information more clearly.
  - 	After the translation team has revised the translation of the story, they should repeat this process with other members of the language community, that is, with speakers of the language who have not been involved in checking the same story before. They should repeat this process with each story until members of the language community can answer the questions well, showing that the translation is communicating the right information clearly.


