<USFM>


<customc52e47>
\c 2
\s False teachers
\p
\v 1 Just like false prophets arose among God's people in times past, the same is happening now: False teachers will rise up among you for sure. They'll teach teachings that really lead astray, and they'll even deny the Lord Jesus who died to set them free. In that way, they'll quickly bring destruction on themselves.
\v 2 Many brothers and sisters in the faith will go astray and follow their way of life— which is the way of life led by lusts. Then, when other people who don't yet believe in Christ see that, they'll insult our teaching, because they'll assume that the false teaching is our teaching, of course.
\v 3 Those false teachers are very greedy. So through tricky teaching, they'll try to deceive you in order to get money. Since beforehand, God has prepared a punishment for them, and He isn't sleeping. He sees everything they're doing, and will certainly destroy them.
\p
\v 4 As the first proof of that, God didn't give forgiveness to the angels who sinned, but they were imprisoned in a dark cavern in hell, to be judged on the Day of Judgment.
\v 5 And the second proof is that God punished the people in Noah's time, when He sent a huge flood. But God protected Noah and seven other people. Noah is the person who told about righteous living, whereas those who were destroyed were the people who refused to repent and serve God.
\v 6 The third proof is that God punished the cities of Sodom and Gomorrah by burning everything in them to ashes. May what happened be a warning to us, so that we don't follow their life style which didn't respect God.
\v 7-8 Notice that God saved Lot. For Lot was a righteous person of course, but he suffered every day because he saw and heard about the depraved lustful actions that the residents of those two cities did. So as long as that righteous man lived among them, his heart was broken because of their actions that were so evil.
\p
\v 9 So from these three examples, it's clear that the Lord God will definitely save the people who serve Him from trouble. And it's certain that evil people will be imprisoned until the time comes for them to be punished on the Judgment Day—
\v 10 especially those who follow various lusts so that they're stained, and they also look down on the leaders of the church.
\p False teachers like that are also arrogant and brag about themselves, to the extent that they are not afraid to insult both the leaders of the church and the chief angels in heaven!
\v 11 However the angels, even though they're more powerful than all human beings, don't insult those false teachers before the Lord.
\v 12 But the false teachers insult whatever they don't know. They aren't intelligent— like animals that act only on instinct. And they're also like animals that are trapped and destroyed. Those false teachers will be destroyed in the same way.
\v 13 That's the reward that they'll receive for their evil actions.
\p Beware! They're happy to associate with us so that they can influence us with their misleading teaching. And they want to come among us and take part in our our dinner parties. But if they take part, they really defile our fellowship. The thing that makes them happiest is— while eating and drinking greedily in our dinner parties, they infiltrate our fellowship and cunningly influence us.
\v 14 Their thoughts are full of desires to commit adultery, and they are never tired of doing evil. They like to seduce and trap our brothers and sisters who've just recently believed. And their hearts are full of greed, so they cleverly deceive people in order to get money. God is ready to punish them!
\p
\v 15 They've gone astray and left the true road. They've followed the road previously taken by Balaam, son of Beor. By that I mean that like him, they're also very happy with the money they receive as a result of their evil actions.
\v 16 But Balaam was immediately rebuked for his sin when God made his donkey talk in man's language. For that reason, Balaam was harshly forbidden by God so that he wouldn't work like a crazy shaman who's greedy for money.
\v 17 Those false teachers are very useless. For people who are spiritually thirsty, they're like dry rivers. Or for farmers that hope for rain, they're like clouds blown away by a strong wind so that it doesn't rain. They won't escape God's punishment which has been prepared in a very dark place for them!
\v 18-19 They give their teachings so that they sound very knowledgeable, but they don't actually make sense. They teach like this: “Now God has set us free, so He won't punish us if we follow various lustful desires that come from our bodies.” With teachings like that, they trap our brothers and sisters who have just left their sinful way of life. For the false teachers say, “Let's live freely,” but the result of that teaching isn't freedom, but slavery. For they themselves are slaves of sin. Whoever is controlled by sin has become a slave to sin.
\p
\v 20 What a shame! For if a person has begun to escape from the various evils of the world because he has just come to know our Lord and Savior Christ Jesus, and then he's snared again and overpowered by sin, his situation is worse than when he was living before he believed in Jesus.
\v 21 For it's better that we don't yet know the teaching about how we are made right by God and are enabled to live in a holy way, than for us to know that teaching but reject it.
\v 22 For that person will be like a dog or a pig in these two proverbs: “A dog that vomits will eat his vomit again.”\x + Amos 26:11\x* And “A pig who has been bathed and is clean, will go back to bathing in the mud puddle.”
</customc52e47>


</USFM>\\ 
~~DISCUSSIONS:on~~
