====== 2. Ya nunan tawuy nanyag kadawakan ======
====== 2. Nangasalanan na Tawu ======

{{:en:obs:obs-02-01.jpg?nolink&640x360}}

Adam and his wife were very happy living in the beautiful garden God had made for them. Neither of them wore clothes, but this did not cause them to feel any shame, because there was no sin in the world. They often walked in the garden and talked with God.

Ya liyaki buy babayi, parisu silan ayin yaming buy a sila mikadêng-êy.

Sadyay tulan Adan buy asawa na. Nanugêl sila sa mangêd da panamnan ya dinyag Bapan Namalyari para kalla. Ayin silang yaming, nuwa asila madêng-êyan, gawan ayin pun kasalanan sa babun luta. Pawa silan maglimbun sa panamnan buy pawa silan makisabi kan Bapan Namalyari.

{{:en:obs:obs-02-02.jpg?nolink&640x360}}

But there was a crafty snake in the garden. He asked the woman, “Did God really tell you not to eat the fruit from any of the trees in the garden?”

Amêsên, si Satanas, napakadyag yan utan. Katanda yan manyag dan papakun sa kadawakan. Buy si Satanas, nakit na si Eva ya ayin awyun. Nagdani ya kana ta sinabi na, “Si Bapan Namalyari nayi ya namawal kamuyun mangan un tagêy kayu sa kaganawan na kayu ya anti baydi?”

Nuwa dilag gisay utan na malaram ya idi sa panamnan. Gisay allu, pinatang nay babayi, “Pêtêg nayin sinabin Bapan Namalyari kamuyuy akaw mangan agyan dakun sabêt ta tagêy puun kayu diyê?”

{{:en:obs:obs-02-03.jpg?nolink&640x360}}

The woman answered, “God told us we could eat the fruit of any tree except from the tree of the knowledge of good and evil. God told us, ‘If you eat that fruit or even touch it, you will die.’”

Ya babayi ya naglagyun Eva, nakitbay ya, “Ya tagêy un kaganawan un tagêy kayu, malyari yan kanên. Nuwa ya tagêy un abiin na kayun mam-in kabiyasnan un tungkul sa mangêd buy narawak, a yan malyarin kanên buy a yan ya malyarin gêgtan ta sinabi un Bapan Namalyari ya nu mangan kay abiin na tagêy, mati kay.”

Nakitbay ya babayi, “Malyari kay mangan dakun sabêt ta tagêy puun kayu di, alwa ta dayin tagêy puun kayun katandan mangêd buy nadawak. Sinabin Bapan Namalyari kanyan, 'Agana yu kanên na abitu, o talanên, ta mati kaw.'”

{{:en:obs:obs-02-04.jpg?nolink&640x360}}

The snake responded, “That is not true! You will not die. God knows that as soon as you eat it, you will be like God and will understand good and evil like he does.”

Amêsên, sinabi nan utan kan Eva,  “A kaw mati nu mangan kaw un abiin na tagêy. Buy nu mangan kaw abiin, matandan yu ya mangêd buy narawak kaparisu kan Bapan Namalyari.”

Nakitbay ya utan, “Asê pêtêg ga abaytu! Akaw mati. Ana labay ipakan kamuyuy tagêy ya abitu gawan nu dinyag yuy abaytu, matandan yu nu sabêt ta mangêd buy nadawak. Parakawnan kaparisun Bapan Namalyari.”

{{:en:obs:obs-02-05.jpg?nolink&640x360}}

The woman saw that the fruit was beautiful and looked delicious. She also wanted to be wise, so she picked some of the fruit and ate it. Then she gave some to her husband, who was with her, and he ate it, too.  

Amêsên, sa nakit nan Eva abaytu ya mangêd da tagêy, namuti yan gisa ta kinnan na. Nangwa ya pun gisany tagêy ta inpakan na êt kan Adan na pagkaawyun na.

Labay labay yan babayin matawayan na tagêy gawan mangêd êlêwên na ati. Labay nan mabiyasa ya kabay namuti yan tagêy buy kinnan nay ati. Binyanan na êt ta asawa na buy nangan ya êt.

{{:en:obs:obs-02-06.jpg?nolink&640x360}}

Suddenly, their eyes were opened, and they realized they were naked. They tried to cover their bodies by sewing leaves together to make clothes.

Sên nayari silan nangan un abituy tagêy kayu, natandan layna ya ayin yaming sila. Buy nangwa silan bulung kayu ta tinayi la ta pamanpan sa lawini la.

Sa dinyag lan abaytu dilag nalyari kalla. Nakitan lay ayin sila awêd yaming. Nanyag silan yaming nga ubat sa bulung kayu abituy pinanakêp lan lawini la.

{{:en:obs:obs-02-07.jpg?nolink&640x360}}

Then the man and his wife heard the sound of God walking through the garden. They both hid from God. Then God called to the man, “Where are you?” Adam replied, “I heard you walking in the garden, and I was afraid, because I was naked. So I hid.”  

Sa kaawat, nalêngê lay tunuy Bapan Namalyari. Si Adan buy si Eva, namaras silan nagtagu sa mani puun kayu. Nuwa nalêngê la ya tunuy Bapan Namalyari, ya sinabi na, “Adan, saantu kayna?” Nakitbay si Adan, “Anti yaku baydi ya nagtagu. Malimu waku kamu buy marêngêy yaku ta ayin nakun yaming.”

Nalêngên miasaway mamita si Bapan Namalyari sa panamnan. Kabay nagtagu sila. Binêg Bapan Namalyari ya liyaki, “Adan, antukay na?” Nakitbay si Adan, “ Nalêngê kuy mamita ka sa panamnan. Nalimu waku kamu gawan ayin nakun yaming. Kabay nagtagu waku.”

{{:en:obs:obs-02-08.jpg?nolink&640x360}}

Then God asked, “Who told you that you were naked? Did you eat the fruit I told you not to eat?” The man answered, “You gave me this woman, and she gave me the fruit.” Then God asked the woman, “What have you done?” The woman replied, “The snake tricked me.”

Amêsên, pinatang na yan Bapan Namalyari, “Sisabêt ta nagsabi kamu ya ayin kan yaming? Nangan ka nayi un tagêy kayun imbawal ku kamuyun kanên?" Nakitbay si Adan, sinabi na, "Si babayi ya indin mun pagkaawyun ku, sabay ya nam-i kangkun tagêy ya kinnan ku.” Sinabin Bapan Namalyari kan Eva, “Awta ta dinyag muy parabaydu ta?” Nakitbay si Eva, ya sinabi na, “Inluku wakun utan ta pinakwa na kun tagêy kayu bayu ku kinnan.”

Pinatang yan Bapan Namalyari, “Sisabêt ta nagsabin ayin kan yaming? Nangan ka nayin tagêy ya aku labay ipakan kamuyu?” Nakitbay si Adan, “Pinakan nakun babayi ya indin mu.” Pinatang Bapan Namalyari ya babayi, “Uysiyan dinyag mu yay abitu ta?” Nakitbay ya babayi, “Napurayit takun utan.”

{{:en:obs:obs-02-09.jpg?nolink&640x360}}

God said to the snake, “You are cursed! You will slide on your belly and eat dirt. You and the woman will hate each other, and your children and her children will hate each other, too. The woman’s descendant will crush your head, and you will wound his heel.”

Sinabin Bapan Namalyari sa utan,  “Alwan mangêd ya dinyag mu. Kabay ubat amêsên, ya bituka mu ya igapang mu. Ati ya babayi ya magin kapati mu. Si anak nan ati ya babayi, sabay ya mamatuk un ulu mu buy sika ya utan, manduyung kan mangayat sa bitis na.”

Sinabin Bapan Namalyari sa utan, “Pan-isumpa kata. Dumakap ka buy alikabuk ka kanên mu. Mipati kaw buy babayi. Pati ya mani anak yu mipati êt. Ya anak babayi sabay ya mallasaw ulu mu. Sika êt ta mangayat un sakungan na.”

{{:en:obs:obs-02-10.jpg?nolink&640x360}}

God then said to the woman, “I will make childbirth very painful for you. You will desire your husband, and he will rule over you.”

Amêsên, sinabi nan Bapan Bapan Namalyari sa babayi, “Magkasakit kan manganak. Pasakup ka sa asawa mu buy sumunul ka kana.”

Ya sinabin Bapan Namalyari sa babayi, “Madyag masakit ta panganak mu. Kaidwan-muy asawa mu buy sunulun mu ya.

{{:en:obs:obs-02-11.jpg?nolink&640x360}}

God said to the man, “You listened to your wife and disobeyed me. Now the ground is cursed, and you will need to work hard to grow food. Then you will die, and your body will return to dirt.” The man named his wife Eve, which means “life-giver,” because she would become the mother of all people. And God clothed Adam and Eve with animal skins.

Sinabin Bapan Namalyari sa liyaki, “Nallêngê ka sa asawa mu buy nangan kan abituy tagêy kayu ya imbawal ku kamun kanên. Kabay ubat amêsên, manayngêt kan mag-obra sa pangabyayan yu sa inallu-allu. Malakê ya diwi ya managêy sa luta yu ya mamasakit kamu. Ya lawini mun ubat sa luta buy mag-urung ya êt sa luta.” Amêsên, si Bapan Namalyari, nanyag yan yaming ya ubat sa balat un saysay.

Sinabi yaman Bapan Namalyari sa liyaki, “ Gawan mas sinunul muy asawa mu kaysa kangku, isumpa kuy luta. Magkasakit kayna pun bayu ka mamupul sa intanêm mu. Buy nu mati ka, mag-udung sa lutay lawini mu.” Ebay inbêg Adan sa asawa na. Ya labay sabin Eba “mam-in biyay” gawan si Ebay mapag-indun kaganawan tawu. Binyanan naman Bapan Namalyarin yaming si Adan buy si Eba. Dyag sa balat ayup pa yaming nga indin na kalla.

{{:en:obs:obs-02-12.jpg?nolink&640x360}}

Then God said, “Now that the human beings have become like us by knowing good and evil, they must not be allowed to eat the fruit of the tree of life and live forever.” So God sent Adam and Eve away from the beautiful garden. God placed large, powerful angels at the entrance to the garden to keep anyone from eating the fruit of the tree of life.

Sinabi na pun Bapan Namalyari, “Si tawu amêsên, kaparisu yina kantamu ta gawan sa kasalanan la, nabiyan silan kabiyasnan ya tungkul sa mangêd buy narawak. Buy amêsên, ipatas ku sila sa lugal la ati ta amên a sila makaêkan un tagêy kayu ya mam-in biyay”, sinabin Bapan Namalyari.

Sinabin Bapan Namalyari, “Kaparisu taminay mani tawu ya magtanday nan mangêd buy nadawak. Dapat asilay na makaêkan tagêy puun kayun biyay gawan asilay na mati.” Kabay inpatas Bapan Namalyari si Adan buy si Eba sa mangêd da panamnan. Mam-i ya êt mangaragul buy mangalakas sa mani ang-el sa dadanan palaku sa panamnan ta amên bênbênan na mani tawun makaên tagêy puun kayun biyay.


//A Bible story from: Genesis 3//