====== 16. ** The Deliverers ======


{{:en:obs:obs-16-01.jpg?nolink&640x360}}


After Joshua died, the Israelites disobeyed God and did not drive out the rest of the Canaanites or obey God’s laws. The Israelites began to worship the Canaanite gods instead of the One True God. The Israelites had no king, so everyone did what they thought was right for them.


Kaban nabiyay sila pun un Josue buy silay mangatwa la, nanunul sila kan Bapan Namalyari. Nuwa sên nati ya mani mangatwa buy si Josue, nangulimên silay na man ya Israelita sa diyusdiyusan lan pamêgên Cananeo, ya nitagan baydu. Buy sabaytun unan panawun, ayin yinan mag-ari kalla. si dinyag lan Israelita, si ikakangêd yinan kay un sarili na, ya pandaygên un balang gisa kalla.

{{:en:obs:obs-16-02.jpg?nolink&640x360}}


As a result of this disobedience, God punished the Israelites by allowing them to be defeated by their enemies. These enemies stole from the Israelites, destroyed their property, and killed many of them. After many years, the Israelites repented and asked God to rescue them.


Oli ha kabiangan nin ō lan Israelita, ket impaloboh nan Apo Dioh a mahakop hilan nanahyon ha palibot la. Ket pinaolayan na hilayna met a paidapan, damaen, pateyen boy makwa ye babandi la. Kaya-bay kakaingalo’y bi-ay lan Israelita anggan lomateng ye panaon a paghehe boy pamakiiingalo hila kanan Apo Dios a iligtah na hila.

Gawan sa kakdêyan un ulu lan Israelita, pinayagan nan Bapan Namalyari ya masakup silan mani bansa sa palitêng la. Buy pinaulayan na silay na êt ya pasakitan, lasakên, patin buy makwa ya pibandiyan la. Kabay mamakapalunus’ya biyay lan Israelita anggan lumatêng ya panawun ya pagsisi buy pamakilunus sila kan Bapan namalyari ya iligtas na sila.


{{:en:obs:obs-16-03.jpg?nolink&640x360}}


Then God provided a deliverer who rescued them from their enemies and brought peace to the land. But then the people forgot about God and started worshiping idols again. So God allowed the Midianites, a nearby enemy tribe, to defeat them.


Buy si Bapan Namalyari, namiutus ya un mamiligtas kalla ya mam-i kapatêtbêkan sa palitêng la. Nuwa panlitêpên lay na man ya inligtas ya dinyag nan Bapan Namalyari kalla buy nangulimên silay na man sa namalyari la. Ta pawa yinan kay parabaydu ya pandaygên la.


{{:en:obs:obs-16-04.jpg?nolink&640x360}}


They took all of the Israelites’ crops for seven years. The Israelites were so scared, they hid in caves so the Midianites would not find them. Finally, they cried out to God to save them.


Dilag gisay allu, ya ikana’ lay uman un Israelita ya a sumunul kan Bapan Namalyari ta labay lay man ya mangulimên sa pandiyusên. Buy si Bapan Namalyari, pinayagan na ya guluwên silan Medianita. Napakkok silay Israelita un pituy tawun. Buy silay kapati lan Israelita ya namupul sa mani tanêm la. Buy gawan sa kasakitan un pangabyay la, nagtagu sila sa kweba ta amên silan a makitan un Medianita. Sa katatawliyan, nakilunus silay na man kan Bapan Namalyari, ya iligtas na silay na man. 

{{:en:obs:obs-16-05.jpg?nolink&640x360}}


One day, a man named Gideon was secretly harvesting grain so the Midianites would not steal it. The angel of God came to Gideon and said, “God is with you, mighty warrior. Go and save Israel from the Midianites.”


Buy si dinyag nan Bapan Namalyari, in-utus na yay ang-el na ya maku kan Gideon. Buy sên nalatêng na yan ang-el ya Gideon, nakatagu yan manggiêk ta amên la ya a makitan un Medianita. Sinabi nan ang-el kana, ya sinabi na, “Sika ya pinili nan Bapan Namalyari ya mamiligtas un Israel. Si inutus un Bapan Namalyari kamu, lasakên mu silay pandiyusên lan bapa mu.” 


{{:en:obs:obs-16-06.jpg?nolink&640x360}}


God told Gideon to tear down his father’s idol. Gideon was afraid of the people, so he waited until nighttime. Then he tore down the idol and smashed it to pieces. He built an altar to God where the idol used to be and made a sacrifice to God.


Kananyain a madeglem, impoang nan Gideon ye andiohen nan bapa na haka tinemek-temek na ya. Ket hiyay natamek-tamek a andiohen, nangipaideng yan altar ha babe na. Ta nangihagpaan na yan digalo kanan Apo Dioh.


{{:en:obs:obs-16-07.jpg?nolink&640x360}}


The next morning the people saw that the idol had been torn down, and they were very angry. They went to Gideon’s house to kill him, but Gideon’s father said, “Why are you trying to help your gods? If they are gods, let them protect themselves!” So Gideon was saved.


Ha pahanib, napoot hilan tobat ye tatao ta nakit lan nadama ye andiohen la. Ket nakew hila ha baey nan Gideon, ta labay la yan pateyen. Noba hinabi nan bapa nan Gideon, a wana kanlan Israelita, “Taket ta antopigan yoy wanabay a dioh yo? No peteg a dioh ye andiohen yo, paolayan yo man awod a hiyabay ye mamae kana. Ta ipatanam na met nin dioh yo ye panamek nan Gideon.” Noba hiyay Gideon, homain yan bega natanamtanam.


{{:en:obs:obs-16-08.jpg?nolink&640x360}}


Then the Midianites came again to steal from the Israelites. There were so many of them that they could not be counted. Gideon called the Israelites together to fight them. Gideon asked God for two signs so he could be sure that God would use him to save Israel.


Ha ahe maboyot, anti hilay naman ye Medianita a manakaw nin popol la. Ket hiyay Gideon, hinagyat na hilay tatao ta omon hila mapaymamaghan lomaban kanlan kabono la. Ket hiyay Gideon, nakikwa yan pamapteg kanan Apo Dioh, no peteg a hiyabay gawien nan Apo Dioh a māngiligtah kanlan Israelita. Kaya-bay homain yan paglowa-lowa.


{{:en:obs:obs-16-09.jpg?nolink&640x360}}


First, he laid a cloth on the ground and asked God to let the morning dew fall only on the cloth and not on the ground. God did that. The next night, he asked that the ground be wet but the cloth dry. God did that too.


Ha ona, nangiapay yan tapih ha lota. Pangayadi, inawok na kanan Apo Dioh a tapih bengat ye maheb nin ambon ta adi na labay a maheb ye lota ha palibot na. Ket tinopad nan Apo Dioh ye inawok na. Ha padeglem, inawok nayna man ye (kahampad) nin onan inawok na a topaden nan Apo Dioh. Ket tinopad na met nin Apo Dioh. Ha wanabay, napagtegan ye pamteg na a haglapan na yan Apo Dioh, ket hamboten na hila lano ye kabono na.


{{:en:obs:obs-16-10.jpg?nolink&640x360}}


32,000 Israelite soldiers came to Gideon, but God told him this was too many. So Gideon sent home 22,000 who were too scared to fight. God told Gideon that he still had too many men. So Gideon sent all of them home except for 300 soldiers.


Main 32,000 a Israelita a nahagyat ha ingat nan Gideon. Noba hinabi nan Apo Dioh kana, a wana, “Malabong hilan tobat.” Ket hiyay Apo Dioh, pinaoli na hilay 22,000, ta angkalimo hilan makilaban kanlan Medianita. Ket 10,000 hilaynan bengat ye nabantak. Noba hinabi nan Apo Dioh kana, “Malabong hila po a tobat.” Ket hiyay Gideon, pinaoli na hilayna man ye kanayon angga ha 300 anan bengat ye nabantak/napatla.


{{:en:obs:obs-16-11.jpg?nolink&640x360}}


That night God told Gideon, “Go down to the Midianite camp and when you hear what they say, you will no longer be afraid.” So that night, Gideon went down to the camp and heard a Midianite soldier telling his friend about a dream. The man’s friend said, “This dream means that Gideon will defeat Midian!” Gideon worshiped God.


Ket hilay napatla, binyanan na hilan titimaghan tamboyok, banga boy pangihagpaan kingki. Ket kananyain a madeglem, malabong hilay angkatoloy a Medianita. Ket pinalibotan la hila. Ket hilay lālaki, tinalongkopan lan banga ye tillag ta omon la hila ahe makitan boy namapakana hila ta omon la hila ahe matanam.


{{:en:obs:obs-16-12.jpg?nolink&640x360}}


Then Gideon returned to his soldiers and gave each of them a horn, a clay pot, and a torch. They surrounded the place where the Midianites were sleeping. The 300 men had the torches in the pots so they could not be seen.


{{:en:obs:obs-16-13.jpg?nolink&640x360}}


Then, at the same time, they all broke the pots that were hiding the torches. They blew their horns and shouted, “A sword for God and for Gideon!”


Ha nayadi lan pinalibotan, nayngingidlan hilan namatnoy nin tamboyok, haka la pinha ye banga a intalangkop la ha tillag la boy nangha hila.


{{:en:obs:obs-16-14.jpg?nolink&640x360}}


God confused the Midianites, so that they attacked each other and started killing each other. Immediately, the rest of the Israelites were called from their homes to come help chase the Midianites. They killed many of them and chased the rest of them out of their land. 120,000 Midianites died that day. God had saved Israel.


Pinaygolo-golo na hilan Apo Dioh ye Medianita. Ket hila met ateed ye ampaypatey-patey. Kaya-bay ampayew hilayna. Hilay Israelita, kinamat la hilan pateyen ye Medianita. Ket malabong ye napatey la. Hilay nakatakah, intaboy la hila ha ilwah nin logal nin Israel. Ket hiyay Apo Dioh, inligtah na hilay Israelita kananyatew a mangaamot.


{{:en:obs:obs-16-15.jpg?nolink&640x360}}


The people wanted to make Gideon their king. Gideon wisely refused their offer, but he asked them for some of the money that each of them had taken from the enemy. Gideon received a lot of money.


Inawok lan Israelita a hiyay Gideon ye labay lan manakop kanla. Noba ahe na ya pinalobohan ye awok la, ta hinabi na, a wana, “Hiko a Dioh yo ye manakop kanyo”. Noba nakikwa ya kanan Apo Dioh ha nahamham la kanlan kabono la. Ket malabong ye natipon na a pilak boy balitok. 


{{:en:obs:obs-16-16.jpg?nolink&640x360}}


Then Gideon did a foolish thing. He made an idol with the money, and the people turned away from God again. They started worshiping Gideon’s idol.


Hiyay Gideon, nanyag yan aliwan manged ha pamilew nan Apo Dioh. Ta nangwa yan pilak boy balitok boy nanyag yan andiohen. Ket yati ye nangibatan nin pangitalingkokol la kanan Apo Dioh. Ta nanowad hila kanlan tataon nanggalang ha andiohen la.


{{:en:obs:obs-16-17.jpg?nolink&640x360}}


God punished Israel again for worshiping idols. Their enemies defeated them. They finally asked God for help, and God sent them another deliverer. This pattern of sin, punishment, repentance, and deliverance was repeated many times. God sent many deliverers who saved Israel from their enemies.


Kaya-bay ampalobohan nan Apo Dioh a mahambot hilay Israelita kanlan kabono la. Ket wanabay ye angkalyadi angga ha makikiingalo hilay naman kanan Apo Dioh. Ket no makiiingalo hila kana, mangitobol ya met ateed nin taon mangiligtah kanla. Ampanombong hilay Israelita kanan Apo Dioh ha anoy panaon. Pangayadi, mag-odong hilay naman ha alan a andiyagen la. Lanang anan wanabay ye andiyagen la ha kaboyotan nin panaon. Malabong hila met ye naitobol a taon mangiligtah kanla. Noba wanabay met ateed a maliwaan la ye kangedan nin Dioh kanla. Oli ta wanabay ye ogali la, katapolan lan Israelita ye matoynong/nadiohan a poon a malyadin manakop boy mangona kanla a manombong kanan Apo Dioh.


{{:en:obs:obs-16-18.jpg?nolink&640x360}}


Finally, the people asked God for a king like all the other nations had. They wanted a king who was tall, strong, and could lead them into battle. God did not like this request, but He gave them what they wanted.


Noba nangawok hilayna man kanan Apo Dioh a magkamain hilan poon a omon ha nanahyon a nakapalibot kanla. Hiyay labay la, maghan matagay, manged, mak-haw, boy makpen mandawohong ha paygobatan la. Noba ahe na kalabayan nin Apo Dioh ye inawok la. Agya wanabay man, binyanan na hilan teed nin poon a manakop kanla. 


//A Bible story from: Judges 1-3; 6-8//