<USFM>

\c 5
\p
\v 1 I said that because we know that our earthly bodies are like tents that are just used temporarily, and then destroyed. But when that happens, God has prepared heavenly bodies for us— which are bodies that are like houses not built by humans and which last forever.
\v 2 For in our tents which we now inhabit, we often moan. For that reason, we really long for heavenly bodies— which we'll put on like new clothes.
\v 3-4 So while we still live in these earthly bodies, we moan because we feel that these bodies are like heavy burdens. But it isn't our desire to let go of these earthly bodies and live like spirits without bodies. We want to quickly put on heavenly bodies. When that happens, God's Word will be fulfilled that says, “The power of death has been defeated”\f + \fr 5:4 \ft Paul used words that are like Is. 25:8. He also quoted that verse in 1Cor. 15:54.\f* by the power of life.
\v 5 That's what God has prepared for us! And He has given His Spirit to us to guarantee all of that for us.
\p
\v 6 That's the reason we always stand firm full of faith. For we know that while we still inhabit these earthly bodies, we can't yet live with the Lord.
\v 7 For we can only live out these lives of ours because of believing completely in all God's promises— not just in things that are seen!
\v 8 For that reason, we should always stand firm full of faith that the moment we no longer wear these earthly bodies, we'll already be living with the Lord.
\v 9 For that reason also, we must always endeavor to make the top goal of our lives be to please God— whether we're still in these earthly bodies or already in heavenly bodies.
\v 10 For we will all stand before the judgment throne of Christ, of course— where we'll receive repayment proportionate to what we did while we were in our earthly bodies, and give an accounting for our deeds, both good and evil.
\s God’s messengers who bring the news that mankind can be have peace with God
\p
\v 11 So because we servants of the Lord understand the meaning of 'fearing the Lord', we try to convince everyone about the news of salvation. God knows the sincerity of our hearts in serving Him. And I hope that in your consciences, you'll also know about the sincerity of our hearts.
\v 12 By writing those things above, my intention once again isn't to brag about our ministry, but I revealed those things to give a reason for which you can be proud that we've served among you. That way you have an answer for those false teachers who brag even more about things that are seen, rather than clean consciences.
\v 13 If people consider us crazy, that doesn't matter! Because we serve God! But if you consider us to be sane, that's better, because we keep trying to serve you, of course.
\v 14 For the love of Christ is what controls our lives, so we're certain that Christ died for everyone. That means that all of us who are one with Him have also died spiritually to our old ways of life.
\v 15 And Christ died for everyone, so that we who still live don't just live for ourselves anymore, but live for Him who died and came back to life for us.
\p
\v 16 For that reason, since we understand all of that, we can't evaluate people according to worldly human standards anymore. We used to evaluate Christ according to human standards of course, but now we don't do that anymore.
\v 17 What's important is that when a person is one with Christ, he has become a new creation! All the ways of the old life are gone, and how beautiful that new life is!
\p
\v 18 And the source of all of those life-changes is God Himself— who by Christ's mediation has made us at peace with Him again. Then He sent us as His servants to tell about that peace.
\v 19 What we tell is that God— through the death of Christ, has opened the way for everyone in this world to be at peace with Him. For those of us who are one with Christ, God no longer counts our sins and wrong doings. That's the news of restored peace that God entrusted to us!
\v 20 It means that we've become messengers of Christ— our King. Through us God is inviting and calling each of you to listen to this message: In Christ Jesus' name be restored to peace with God!
\v 21 Remember that Christ never ever sinned, but God made Him be treated like a sinful person in order to bear our sin. God did that so that we who are one with Christ are made right before God.

</USFM>
~~DISCUSSIONS:on~~
